IBAGUÃ‰, Colombia, Apr 08 (IPS)  - "Things are getting worse and worse," Enrique Muñoz, a 67-year-old farmer from the municipality of Cajamarca in the central Colombian department of Tolima, once known as the country's breadbasket, said sadly. The home of a poor farming family in the mountains of Cajamarca, in the central Colombian department of Tolima.  Credit: Helda Martínez/IPS"Over the past five decades, the situation took a radical turn for the worse," activist Miguel Gordillo commented to IPS, referring to what is happening in Tolima, whose capital is Ibagué, 195 km southwest of Bogotá. "Fifty years ago, Ibagué was a small city surrounded by crops - vast fields of cotton that looked from far away like a big white sheet," said Gordillo, head of the non-governmental Asociación Nacional por la Salvación Agropecuaria (National Association to Save Agriculture). "In Tolima we planted maize, tobacco, soy, sorghum and fruit trees, and the mountains that surrounded Cajamarca were covered with green coffee bushes protected by orange trees, maize and plantain, and surrounded by celery," Muñoz said. His voice lost in the past, he said the farms in the area also had "piggies, chickens, mules, cows; everything was so different. "Gordillo said, "In the north of the department we had fruit trees of all kinds, and the rivers were chock full of fish.  There's still rice, some maize, coffee…but even the fish have disappeared. "In short, in five decades the look of this agricultural region has changed, and today it's all freeways, residential complexes, gas stations, and here and there the odd field with crops," he complained. As a result, everything changed for Muñoz.  "My wife and I are now supported by our kids who work, one in Ibagué and two in Bogotá.  On the farm we have a cow, whose milk we use to make cheese that we sell, and we plant food for our own consumption. "Muñoz plans to take part in the second national farmers' strike, on Apr.  27, which the government is trying to head off. The first, which lasted from Aug.  19 to Sep.  9, 2013, was held by coffee, rice, cotton, sugar cane, potato and cacao farmers, who demanded that the government of Juan Manuel Santos revise the chapters on agriculture in the free trade agreements (FTAs) signed by Colombia, especially the accord reached with the United States. The national protest was joined by artisanal miners, transport and health workers, teachers and students, and included massive demonstrations in Bogotá and 30 other cities. Clashes with the security forces left 12 dead, nearly 500 injured and four missing. Colombia has signed over 50 FTAs, according to the ministry for economic development. The highest profile are the FTA signed in 2006 with the United States, which went into effect in May 2012, and the agreement with the European Union, that entered into force in August 2013, besides the FTAs with Canada and Switzerland.  Another is currently being negotiated with Japan. In 2011, Colombia founded the Pacific Alliance with Chile, Mexico and Peru, and Panama as an observer.  It also belongs to other regional integration blocs. "Colombia's governments, which since the 1990s have had the motto ‘Welcome to the future', lived up to it: that future has been terrible for Tolima and the entire country," Gordillo said. In the last four years, coffee farmers have held strikes until achieving subsidies of 80 dollars per truckload of coffee. In this South American country of 48. 2 million people, agriculture accounts for 6. 5 percent of GDP, led by coffee, cut flowers, rice and bananas.  But that is down from 14 percent of GDP in 2000 and 20 percent in 1975. "Agriculture is doing poorly everywhere, and Tolima is no exception," the department'secretary of agricultural development, Carlos Alberto Cabrera, told IPS. "Rice, which is strong in our department, is having a rough time," he said.  "In coffee, we are the third-largest producers in the country, and we hope to become the first.  There's not much cotton left.  In sorghum we are the second-largest producers.  Soy is disappearing, tobacco too, and many products are now just grown for the food security of our farmers. "In the search for solutions, "we have invited ministers and deputy ministers to the region, but their response has been that we should plant what sells, to stay in the market of supply and demand," he said. But Cabrera said that in the case of Tolima, the FTAs weren't a problem.  "We haven't felt any effect, because the only thing we export is coffee.  Rice is for national consumption, and sorghum goes to industry," he said. Gordillo, meanwhile, criticised that when ministers visit the department, "they say farmers should plant what other countries don't produce, what they can't sell to us.  In other words, they insist on favouring others.  They forget that the first priority should be the food security of our people, and not the other way around. "Because of this misguided way of looking at things, he said, "our farmers will hold another national strike.  People from Tolima and from many other regions of the country will take part, because the government isn't living up to its promises, and all this poverty means they have to open their eyes. "The government says it has fulfilled at least 70 of the 183 commitments it made to the country's farmers after last year's agriculture strike. The farmers were demanding solutions such as land tenure, social investment in rural areas, protection from growing industries like mining and oil, and a fuel subsidy for agricultural producers. The government says it earmarked 500 million dollars in support for agriculture in the 2014 budget. In the last few weeks, the ministry of agriculture and rural development has stepped up a campaign showing off its results, and President Santos has insisted in public speeches that "a new farmers' strike is not justified. "The authorities are also pressing for dialogue to reach a national pact with farmers, as part of their efforts to ward off the strike scheduled for less than a month ahead of the May 25 presidential elections, when Santos will run for a second term. Small farmers and other participants in a Mar.  15-17 "agricultural summit" agreed on eight points that should be discussed in a dialogue, including agrarian reform, access to land, the establishment of peasant reserve zones, prior consultation on projects in farming and indigenous areas, protection from FTAs, and restrictions on mining and oil industry activities. 