UNITED NATIONS, Jun 09 (IPS)  - At the end of this week leaders of the Group of 77 and China will meet in Bolivia to commemorate the 50th anniversary of the group. Young Bangladeshi women raise their fists at a protest in Shahbagh.  Credit: Kajal Hazra/IPSFrom the original 77, this group now brings together 133 countries, making it the largest coalition of governments on the international stage.  Promoting an agenda of equity among nations and among people, sustainable and inclusive development and global solidarity have been at the heart of the G77's priorities since its inception.  But none of it will be achieved without fully embracing the agenda of gender equality and women's empowerment. Two weeks ago, I travelled to Bolivia to attend a historic international meeting in preparation for the G77 Summit, exclusively dedicated to women and gender equality.  More than 1,500 women, many of them indigenous, packed the room, full of energy.  Evo Morales, the president of Bolivia, was also present – a testimony to his commitment and leadership to this critical agenda. At this meeting, a message emerged, loud and clear.  If we want the 21st century to see the end of discrimination, inequality and injustice, we must focus on women and girls – half the world's population, which continues to experience discrimination every day and everywhere.  The 20th century saw the end of colonisation.  Now the 21st century must see the end of discrimination against women.   From decolonisation, we must move to depatriarchilisation.  Lakshmi Puri, deputy executive director of UN Women, speaks at a press conference on the International Day to End Violence Against Women.  Credit: UN Photo/Mark GartenThis meeting took place at a critical time and in a significant place.  Latin America has lived through its own struggles against discrimination and oppression.  In a continent that used to be marked by striking inequalities and violent dictatorships, a vibrant movement has emerged to put the region on the path of social justice, democracy, and equality.  In Bolivia there is a constitutional law against violence against women and a law against political violence, making it a pioneer in the region and beyond. This hope for a brighter and more just future must now spread to the world as a whole, and the G77 can play a defining role.  The elaboration of the Post-2015 development agenda and Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) is coming to a critical point.  The Open Working Group on Sustainable Development Goals is about to complete its work and member states will finalise the new development agenda in the course of next year. This coincides with the 20-year review and appraisal of the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action, the landmark international framework to achieve gender equality and women's rights.  Beijing+20 provides us with an opportunity to drive accelerated and effective implementation of the gender equality and women's rights agenda and to ensure that it is central to the new development framework. We need to take full advantage of these processes and their interconnections to ensure that gender equality, women's rights and women's empowerment feature prominently in the new development agenda and to accelerate implementation. We have a historic opportunity and a collective responsibility to make the rights and well-being of women and girls a political priority; both globally and within every country.  To this end, the new framework must adopt a comprehensive, rights-based and transformative approach that addresses structural inequality and gender-based discrimination. This comprehensive approach must include targets to eliminate discrimination against women in laws and policies; end violence against women; ensure the realisation of sexual and reproductive health and rights of women and adolescent girls throughout their life cycles; and the recognition, reduction and redistribution of unpaid care work. Now is the time to put the full political weight behind passage of long-pending legislation to eliminate discrimination against women and promote gender equality. Now is the time to allocate the resources to fund services for victims and survivors of violence against women. Now is the time to strengthen national data collection and undertake a time use survey to better understand unpaid care work or a survey on violence against women. Now is the time to make public spaces safe for women and girls. Now is the time to improve rural infrastructure to strengthen women's access to markets and help tackle rural feminised poverty. Now is the time to showcase champions of gender equality, to recognise role models that have overcome stereotypes and helped level the playing field for girls and women in all areas, in politics and business, in academia and in public service, in the home and the community. Mahatma Gandhi rightly said that true freedom from colonialism will not be achieved unless each and every citizen is free, equal and is able to realise his or her potential.  The 21st century must see the end of the centuries' old practice of patriarchy and gender discrimination, and unshackle women and girls so they can fully enjoy their human rights. When the G77 meets later this week at its 50th anniversary commemorative Summit, I have high hopes that they will make this defining agenda of gender equality and women's empowerment a centerpiece of their global development and freedom project for the next 50 years. (END)*Lakshmi Puri is the deputy executive director of U. N.  Women, based in New York. 