ROME, Sep 22 (IPS)  - The idea of creating Inter Press Service (IPS) arose in the early 1960s in response to awareness that a vacuum existed in the world of journalism, which had two basic aspects. Firstly, there was a marked imbalance in international information sources.  World news production was concentrated in the largest industrialised countries and dominated by a few powerful agencies and syndicates in the global North. By contrast, there was a lack of information about developing countries in the South and elsewhere; there was hardly any information about their political, economic and social realities, except when natural disasters occurred, and what little was reported was culturally prejudiced against these countries.  In other words, not much of an image and a poor image at that. 3Secondly, there was an overall shortage of analysis and explanation of the processes behind news events and a lack of in-depth journalistic genres such as features, opinion articles and investigative journalism among the agencies. Agencies published mainly ‘spot' news, that is, brief pieces with the bare news facts and little background.  Clearly this type of journalism did not lend itself to covering development-related issues. When reporting an epidemic or a catastrophe in a Third World country, spot news items merely describe the facts and disseminate broadcast striking images.  What they 
generally do not do is make an effort to answer questions such as why diseases that have disappeared or are well under control in the North should cause such terrible regional pandemics in less developed countries, or why a major earthquake in Los Angeles or Japan should cause much less damage and fewer deaths than a smaller earthquake in Haiti. Superficiality and bias still predominate in international journalism. While it is true that contextualised analytical information started to appear in the op-ed ("opposite the editorial page") section of Anglo-Saxon newspapers, the analysis and commentary they offered concentrated on the countries of the North and their interests. Today the number of op-eds that appear is much greater than in the 1960s, but the predominant focus continues to be on the North. This type of top-down, North-centred journalism served the interests of industrialised countries, prolonging and extending their global domination and the subordination of non-industrialised countries that export commodities with little or no added value. This unequal structure of global information affected developing countries negatively.  For example, because of the image created by scanty and distorted information, it was unlikely that the owners of expanding businesses in a Northern country would decide to set up a factory in a country of the South. After all, they knew little or nothing about these countries and, given the type of reporting about them that they were accustomed to, assumed that they were uncivilised and dangerous, with unreliable judicial systems, lack of infrastructure, and so on. Obviously, few took the risk, and investments were most frequently North-North, reinforcing development in developed countries and underdevelopment in underdeveloped countries. In the 1960s, those of us who created IPS set ourselves the goal of working to correct the biased, unequal and distorted image of the world projected by international agencies in those days. Political geography and economics were certainly quite different then.  Countries like Brazil, which is now an emerging power, used to be offhandedly dismissed with the quip: "It's the country of the future – and always will be. "At the time, decolonisation was under way in Africa, Asia and the Caribbean.  Latin America was politically independent but economically dependent.  The Non-Aligned Movement was created in 1961. IPS never set out to present a "positive" image of the countries of the South by glossing over or turning a blind eye to the very real problems, such as corruption.  Instead, we wished to present an objective view, integrating information about the South, its viewpoints and interests, into the global information media. This implied a different approach to looking at the world and doing journalism.  It meant looking at it from the viewpoint of the realities of the South and its social and economic problems. Let me give an example which has a direct link to development. The media tend to dwell on what they present as the negative consequences of commodity price rises: they cause inflation, are costly for consumers and their families, and distort the world economy.  Clearly, this is the viewpoint of the industrialised countries that import cheap raw materials and transform them into manufactured goods as the basis for expanding their businesses and competing in the global marketplace. It is true that steep and sudden price increases for some commodities can create problems in the international economy, as well as affect the population of some poor countries that have to import these raw materials. But generalised and constant complaints about commodities price increases fail to take into account the statistically proven secular trend towards a decline in commodity prices (with the exception of oil since 1973) compared with those of manufactured goods. IPS's editorial policy is to provide news and analyses that show how, in the absence of fair prices and proper remuneration for their commodities, and unless more value is added to agricultural and mineral products, poor countries reliant on commodity exports cannot overcome underdevelopment and poverty. Many communications researchers have recognised IPS's contribution to developing a more analytical and appropriate journalism for focusing on and understanding economic, social and political processes, as well as contributing to greater knowledge of the problems faced by countries of the South. Journalists addressing development issues need, in the first place, to undertake critical analysis of the content of news circulating in the information arena. Then they must analyse economic and social issues from the "other point of view", that of marginalised and oppressed people, and of poor countries unable to lift themselves out of underdevelopment because of unfavourable terms of trade, agricultural protectionism, and so on. They must understand how and why some emerging countries are succeeding in overcoming underdevelopment, and what role can be played by international cooperation. They also need to examine whether the countries of the North and the international institutions they control are imposing conditions on bilateral or multilateral agreements that actually perpetuate unequal development. World economic geography and politics may have changed greatly since the 1960s, and new information technologies may have revolutionised the media of today, but these remain some important areas in which imbalanced and discriminatory news treatment is evident. In conclusion, a journalist specialised in development issues must be able to look at and analyse information and reality from the "other side. " In spite of globalisation and the revolution in communications, this "other side" continues to be unknown and disregarded, and occupies a marginal position in the international information universe. An appreciation of the true dimensions of the above issues, 
the contrast between them and the information and analysis we are fed daily by the predominant media virtually all over the world – not only in the North, but also many by media in the South – leads to the obvious conclusion that there is a crying need for unbiased global journalism to help correct North-South imbalance. To this arduous task and still far-off goal, IPS has devoted its wholehearted efforts over the past half century. (Edited by Phil Harris)