UNITED NATIONS, Nov 20 (IPS)  - Numerous international and national efforts have focused on gender equality and the empowerment of women.  The United Nations, for example, has convened four world conferences on women - Beijing in 1995, Nairobi in 1985, Copenhagen in 1980 and Mexico City in 1975 - and Member States have adopted various international agreements, such as the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action and the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW). Achieving true gender equality, however, requires resolving the many inequities, discriminations and barriers that are encountered by both women and men.  Concentrating attention, policies and programmes on the inequalities, biases and obstacles confronting women, while largely ignoring those of men is an unproductive and limited strategy for attaining true gender equality. 3It is important to acknowledge at the very outset that women's rights and men's rights are human rights.  According to the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, all human beings are born free and equal in dignity and rights and are entitled to life, liberty and security of person. Moreover, empowering women and men is also an indispensable tool for advancing both human and national development, reducing poverty and improving prospects for future generations. Men suffer a widely acknowledged disadvantage compared to women with respect to perhaps the most important dimension: longevity.  Men have shorter life spans and higher mortality than women at virtually all ages.  Males, on average live four years less than females worldwide, five years less in the United States, seven years less in Japan and 10 years less in Russia. The gender gap is considerable at older ages due to men's shorter lives.  Men are a growing minority across each 10-year age group of the aged population worldwide (Figure 1).  For example, men represent 40 percent of those in the age group 80-89 years.  Source: United Nations Population Division. In some countries, for example, Austria, China, Italy, Russia, Switzerland and the United Kingdom, statutory retirement ages for men are higher than for women, even though men have fewer potential years for retirement than women.  Furthermore, when they meet the same participatory requirements, men receive similar social security benefits as women, without regard to men's fewer years of retirement. With respect to education, girls generally outperform boys in most developed countries by receiving better grades and teacher assessments, while having lower school dropout rates than boys.  In the crucial area of higher education, women now outnumber men worldwide in both university attendance and graduation. Regarding childbearing and childrearing, fathers in most industrialised countries generally have little to say about the outcome of a pregnancy even though they will likely incur responsibilities and costs for the child. Women have the right to choose whether to have an abortion or carry the pregnancy to term, even if the father objects to her decision.  Moreover, while women may opt for artificial insemination to have a child, men are generally barred from using surrogacy to have a child. Men who stay home to raise children are often looked down upon for not financially supporting their families.  However, it is still acceptable for women to stay at home and focus on childcare.   Also in contrast to women, men are still expected to enter the labour force early in their lives and are under enormous pressure to be successful providers for the material needs of their families. Also in cases of divorce in the Western world where child custody is involved, courts most often rule in favour of the mother rather than the father.  Moreover, in those instances where the father does receive child custody, he is less likely to receive child support than custodial mothers. With regard to the occupational structure of most countries, men have to cope with the widely unacknowledged "glass floor". The glass floor is the invisible barrier limiting the entry of men into the traditional occupations of women, such as pre-school and primary teachers, secretaries/administrative assistants, nurses and medical/dental aides.  If gender equality is desired at higher occupational levels, then it is also necessary at lower levels as well. In hazardous jobs, such as mining, logging, fishing, iron and steel work, men are the overwhelming majority of workers.  Consequently, men are far more likely to suffer a fatal injury or work-related disability than women.  Moreover, the construction, manufacturing and production sectors are shrinking in many developed countries, resulting in fewer traditional jobs for men. Concerning sports, boys and men are more often encouraged to participate in more violent activities, such as football, hockey and boxing, than girls and women.  As a result, men are at greater risk of suffering serious sports-related injuries and incurring long-term or permanent brain damage. In armed conflicts both domestic and international, men and boys are more likely to participate in combat than women.  Consequently, men suffer more trauma, disability and death than women in such conflicts. Men have a higher probability of being victims of homicide.  Among ethnic minorities, homosexuals and marginalised groups, men are also more likely to experience discrimination, hostility and violence than women.  In addition, men are more often incarcerated in jails, prisons and hospitals and serve longer jail terms than women for the same criminal offenses, with women being released earlier on parole than men. Men are more likely than women to be homeless, often the result of job loss, insufficient income, mental health issues or drug addiction.  The consumption of tobacco and alcohol is greater for men than women globally, with men smoking nearly five times as much as women and six percent of male deaths related to alcohol compared to one percent of female deaths. Also, in most countries more men than women commit suicide.  Nevertheless, men are less likely than women to seek help and treatment for alcoholism, substance abuse, mental illness and chronic health problems. It should be evident that simply focusing attention, policies and programmes on the inequalities and biases that women encounter while largely ignoring those facing men will obstruct and delay efforts to attain gender equality.  Achieving true gender equality requires recognising and resolving the inequities, discrimination and barriers that are encountered by both women and men alike. Edited by Kanya D'Almeida