UNITED NATIONS, Mar 24 (IPS)  - This year has many initiatives taking place in the realm of women's leadership, but one platform and movement in particular is standing out, and people are noticing.  We are the founders of IMPACT Leadership 21, leadership architects for inclusive, high growth economies. Young Bangladeshi women raise their fists at a protest in Shahbagh.  Credit: Kajal Hazra/IPSAs a global social enterprise, the organisation is committed to inclusive and sustainable leadership at the top level.   This commitment is the driving force behind our core mission:  ACCELERATE women's leadership at the highest levels of influence in the 21st century. 3Following is a conversation about the goals and strategies of IMPACT Leadership 21. Janet:  Constance and I have a wealth of experience in many sectors.   We have operated in corporate, governmental, non-profit, diplomatic, and entrepreneurial arenas.   We observed that there were gaps across all sectors hindering the pace of advancement.   We developed discussion forums and targeted training modules to address these gaps. Constance:  We grew tired of the same dialogue and not seeing the needle move very much.   We grew impatient and decided to take action. Janet:  IMPACT represents the core values and principles required for transformational leadership.  I – Innovation, M – Multiculturalism, P – Passion, A – Attunement, C – Collaboration, and T – Tenacity. Together with our partners, we:
Convene catalytic conversations and forums that revolutionise global leadership. Provide tools, resources, opportunities and channels that equip leaders to succeed in a global, hyper-connected world. Inspire emerging global leaders to be catalysts for change. Engage men as powerful ambassadors for change and a gender balanced leadership at the top. Constance:  We provide discussions forums and trainings to assist companies and individuals.   Through our framework, we help clients identify challenges, then structure actionable step to help them overcome those challenges.  Our forums are designed to identify, build, and engage business/social ecosystems that are industry specific to accelerate leadership.   If you want to build strong leadership, we are your architects. Starting in 2012, IMPACT Leadership 21 has introduced three core programmes:  the Leadership Acceleration Training Program/High IMPACT, the Emerging Global Leaders Program, and Conversations with Men.   The Emerging Global Leaders Program was taught at Columbia University (School of International Public Affairs and Teachers College) and as an academy at the United Nations. Conversations with Men was a featured content segment at the 2014 California Women's Conference in Long Beach, CA and the 2014 GOLD Symposium in Tokyo. Janet:  I created these programmes to address a need seen worldwide.   Conversations with Men has a very special place.   Women's initiatives make the mistake of not including men in the acceleration of women's leadership.   The men hold the majority of the cards; you need dialogue to have people understand the importance of gender parity. Constance:  If you examine any great movement in history, you'll see that the success comes from the efforts of those immediately affected, partnering with those bystanders that are sympathetic to the cause.   I mentioned this in 2012.   We launched our first Conversations with Men in April 2013.   We held it at the United Nations in February 2014.   After that, others started developing like minded initiatives, such as He for She and Lean In Together.   Many dismissed us at first, but history leaves clues to success.   It's hard to dispute the history.  We've pioneered this level of forum and training for the 21st century. A movement and platform cannot go far without support, and this couple has some remarkable people in their corner. Janet:  We are very humbled to have such incredible pillars to our success, very high profile champions and supporters that have really rolled up their sleeves to help us. Our foremost driving force since the beginning is Ambassador Anwarul Chowdhury (Former Under-Secretary-General of the United Nations and popularly known as the "Father of 1325", the U. N.  Security Council resolution which focused on women, peace and security). Ambassador Chowdhury's tireless, hands-on  commitment and advocacy on ensuring equal participation of women at all levels of leadership continues to inspire the work we do as we accelerate women's global leadership at the top.   It is because of this relentless spirit of championing women's equality as a man, that we honored Ambassador Chowdhury with the first IMPACT Leadership 21 Frederick Douglass Award in 2013. Ambassador Josephine Ojiambo (Deputy Secretary General of the Commonwealth Secretariat), Ambassador Edita Hrda (Permanent Representative of the Czech Republic to U. N. ) and Michaela Walsh (Founding President, Women's World Banking) have also been in our corner from the beginning, and continue to be guide and support us.  Leslie Grossman, Founder of Women's Leadership Exchange, emphatically joined us immediately after our first event and now serves as vice chair of our Global Advisory Council. Constance:  They are our "salmon swimming upstream".   Unheard of for most other fish, but second nature to the salmon.   They are our mentors and guides as we challenge the status quo, as we challenge the ways it's always been done, challenge the seemingly impossible.   We've caught the vision of a changed world, now we are helping others see it.  Someone always has to dream. You can meet the leadership architects of IMPACT on Mar.  25, 2015 at the United Nations, convening their pioneering programme, Power of Collaboration, now in its second year.   For more information please visit impactleadership21. com or email communications@impactleadership21. com Edited by Kitty Stapp