UNITED NATIONS, Jun 02 (IPS)  - When the United Nations hosted a panel discussion last year urging its partners to "break their silence" on open defecation, Singapore's deputy permanent representative Mark Neo was outspoken in his characterisation: "Open defecation is a euphemism.  What we are talking about is shitting in the open. "An open drainage ditch in Ankorondrano-Andranomahery, Madagascar.  Credit: Lova Rabary-Rakontondravony/IPSAnd over one billion people worldwide do so every day. 3In India alone, there are nearly 600 million people (out of a total population of over 1. 2 billion) without access to sanitation, according to the Water Supply and Sanitation Collaborative Council (WSSCC) based in Geneva. Currently, about 35 countries, mostly in Africa and Asia, fall into that category, including Niger, Sierra Leone, Mali, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Zimbabwe, Mozambique, Ethiopia, Guinea, Liberia, Bangladesh, Madagascar, Nepal, Angola, Pakistan, Myanmar, Cambodia, Congo, India and Laos, among many others. A new study by the Geneva-based Global Sanitation Fund (GSF), released Tuesday, says 2. 5 billion people, or 40 percent of the global population, lack access to decent sanitation, including more than a billion who defecate in the open. Still there is progress: nationally-led sanitation programmes supported by the GSF have enabled 4. 2 million people to have improved toilets; seven million people and more than 20,500 communities to be free of open-defecation; and eight million people with handwashing facilities. "These results prove that we are moving closer to our vision of a world where everybody has sustained sanitation and hygiene, supported by safe water," said Chris Williams, executive director of WSSCC. "This is a crucial step towards achieving better health, reducing poverty and ensuring environmental sustainability for the most marginalised people in the world. "The study says diarrheal disease, largely caused by poor sanitation and hygiene, is a leading cause of malnutrition, stunting and child mortality, claiming nearly 600,000 under-five lives every year.  Inadequate facilities also affect education and economic productivity and impact the dignity and personal safety of women and girls. The governments of Australia, Finland, the Netherlands, Sweden, Switzerland and the United Kingdom have contributed to the GSF since its establishment by WSSCC in 2008. Close to 105 million dollars has been committed for 13 country programmes, and aimed at reaching about 36 million people. The GSF says the results have been achieved due to the work of more than 200 partners, including executing agencies and sub-grantees composed of representatives from governments, international organisations, academic institutions, the United Nations and civil society. One of the strongest success factors in the GSF approach is that it allows flexibility for countries to develop their programmes within the context of their own institutional framework and according to their own specific sanitation and hygiene needs, sector capacity and stakeholders, says a press release. This implementation methodology is used to reach large numbers of households in a relatively short period of time and is vital for scaling up safe sanitation and hygiene practices. The GSF has been described as " a pooled financing mechanism with the potential to further accelerate access to sanitation for hundreds of millions of people over the next 15 years. "Between 2013 and 2014 alone, the GSF reported an almost 90 percent increase in the number of people living open-defecation free in target regions of 13 countries across Africa and Asia. During this same period, the GSF also supported a 55 percent increase in the number of people with access to improved toilets in those same areas. The United Nations system has identified global funds as an important tool to enable member countries to achieve their national development targets, including those for sanitation and hygiene. Edited by Kitty StappThe writer can be contacted at thalifdeen@aol. com