UNITED NATIONS, Jun 19 (IPS)  - This September, we usher in the post-2015 development agenda with a set of Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) agreed upon by Member States, with civil society participation, based on national, regional and global consultations. Kairat Abdrakhmanov, Permanent Representative of the Republic of Kazakhstan to the U. N.  Credit: UN Photo/Evan SchneiderThese goals are transformative and their impact goes far beyond the current Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) in vision, complexity, outreach and implications. 3Amongst them is Goal 16, according to which countries will "promote peaceful and inclusive societies with justice for all and build effective, accountable and transparent institutions at all levels". Building civil service excellence will therefore certainly be critical to achieving this goal.  Likewise, the proposed Goal 17 on means of implementation calls for institutional capacity building in developing countries to support national plans to operationalise all the SDGs, including through North-South, South-South and Triangular cooperation. Both of these gave birth to the idea of creating the Regional Hub of Civil Service in Astana, at the initiative of the Republic of Kazakhstan with a view to seek innovative mechanisms to ensure equitable, effective and efficient delivery of public service to its people. But the intent was also for the wider region of Central Asia and CIS countries to gain from it through advancing "the knowledge base, evidence-informed solutions, practical tools and guidance, and pursuit of emerging and innovative public administration and management models and thinking". The idea of setting up this Hub arose from the struggles of a country in transition.  Kazakhstan, since its Independence, just like other newly independent nations in the region witnessed profound political, socio-economic and administrative transformations. In the early nineties, the economic linkages of Kazakhstan with other 14 republics were abruptly discontinued which led to increased unemployment, devaluation of savings and galloping inflation of up to 2500 per cent. Against this backdrop, the President of Kazakhstan, H. E.  Mr.  Nursultan Nazarbayev, first of all, initiated socio-economic reforms, followed by innovations and reforms in the administrative sphere, which the evolving times demanded. Having no experience of market economy, the Government had to implement reforms with the available personnel.  However, the President's long term vision of subsequent reforms required a new generation of public sector leaders and technocrats which resulted in a generous scholarship programme offered by the Government. The objective was to provide talented youth with free access to education in leading universities globally.  Since 1993, about 10,000 Kazakh students gained degrees in the best universities and joined the job market at home, including the civil service. This scholarship scheme has been serving to level the playing field by providing access to quality education and developing capable and well qualified human capital. Having stabilised economic growth in the 1990s, Kazakhstan went further and was first among the CIS countries to significantly modernise its civil service with meritocracy as the key principle. We acknowledged that the sustainability of reforms was heavily dependent on the quality of institutions, and of the civil service, in particular. Importantly, the key characteristics of reforms in Kazakhstan have always been logical consistency and continuity.  A clear indication of this is the set of five institutional reforms recently announced by our President, the first of which is improved civil service modernisation. The aim here is to form a professional, accountable and transparent state apparatus in order to ensure sustainable development of the country.  The responsible body for this is the National Commission on Modernisation headed by the Prime Minister of Kazakhstan. Under this process of transformation, criteria will be established to monitor activities and evaluate the efficiency of each Government agency, concerned minister or local governor. The role of communities in state bodies and local administration will also be strengthened by allowing them to participate and monitor results of strategic plans and development programmes.  Civil society will also be engaged in the process of identifying budgets, relevant laws and regulations. In this endeavour, the U. N.  Development Programme (UNDP) as a trusted partner has been continuously supporting the reform efforts in Kazakhstan since our Independence.  Now, we count on the longer term strategic partnership with UNDP all the more, particularly with regards to all the five institutional reforms. Clearly, Kazakhstan believes in sharing accumulated experience and knowledge, as well as promoting cooperation among the countries and institutions in its region and beyond.  Therefore, Kazakhstan's initiative of the Regional Hub of Civil Service in Astana was founded by 25 countries and five international organisations, at a founding conference in 2013, with UNDP as the key partner. The aim of the Astana Hub is to facilitate regional, as well as inter-regional professional dialogue in order to promote civil service excellence.  This idea has resonated with the Hub today comprising more than 30 countries in 2014, including OECD and EU member countries, as well as China, India, Turkey, and CIS countries.  The Hub is thus fostering dialogue between countries of Europe and Asia. Last year also saw the Hub taking concrete shape with an agreement between the Government of Kazakhstan and UNDP, by which Kazakhstan agreed to make considerable resources available to support the Hub and thus expand its scope and gains to enhance the field of civil service in the region and beyond. As Helen Clark, the Administrator of UNDP, noted, "establishment of the Hub and its success has been made possible because countries like Kazakhstan are ready to share their experiences with reforms…such as the introduction of meritocracy into professional civil service". According to UNDP, "the Hub also offers the potential for continuing Kazakhstan's emerging global role in providing official development assistance (ODA) to other countries". Kazakhstan, with guidance from UNDP, has established its national agency for international aid, called KazAID, which marks an important evolution and achievement in the country's significance regionally and globally.  The support and partnership will focus on Africa, the landlocked countries and small island developing states. Kazakhstan will continually aspire to serve as an active contributor to the global development agenda.  Our efforts will add practical solutions for implementing the post-2015 phase most effectively, with particular relevance to Sustainable Development Goal 16, which calls for inter alia promoting accountable institutions and ensuring responsive, inclusive, participatory and representative decision-making at all levels. To conclude, Kazakhstan, stands ready and is fully committed to help facilitate regional and interregional initiatives in civil service excellence, and contribute concretely to the achievement of the SDGs in the coming years. Edited by Kitty Stapp