PARIS, Sep 01 (IPS)  - The Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD), once a domain of the rich countries, is keen to extend its global membership and has set out a clear path for Costa Rica's membership, within months of launching accession discussions with Colombia and Latvia. As part of this strategy, the 34-nation OECD has in fact been strengthening cooperation with Brazil, India, Indonesia, the People's Republic of China and South Africa through ‘Enhanced Engagement' programmes. According to OECD official sources, over time the organisation's focus "has broadened to include extensive contacts with non-members and it now maintains cooperative relations with a large number of them. "Li Keqiang, Premier of the State Council of the People's Republic of China, paid a historic visit to the OECD on Jul 1, 2015, to sign cooperation agreements in a move that will bolster ongoing collaboration. The visit to the OECD, the first by a Chinese state leader, coincided with the 20th anniversary of OECD-China relations, as well as China's upcoming Presidency of the G20 in 2016. Premier Li Keqiang delivered a keynote address in the context of the OECD Leaders Programme.  He was accompanied by a number of ministers and high-ranking officials from the Chinese government. OECD's Global Relations Secretariat (GRS) develops and oversees the strategic orientations of OECD's global relations with non-members.  More than 15 Global Fora have been established to address trans-boundary issues where the relevance of OECD work is dependent on policy dialogue with non-members. Regional initiatives cover Europe, the Caucasus and Central Asia; Asia; Latin America; and the Middle East and North Africa (MENA).  The Sahel and West Africa Club creates, promotes and facilitates links between OECD members and West Africa. Helping improve public governance and management in European Union candidate countries, potential candidates and European Neighbourhood Policy partners is the mission of a joint OECD-EU initiative, the Support for Improvement in Governance and Management (SIGMA) programme. The OECD's current members are Austria, Australia, Belgium, Canada, Chile, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Korea, Luxembourg, Mexico, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Slovak Republic, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey, the United Kingdom and the United States. On Jul.  8, 2015, OECD members adopted the Roadmap for the Accession of Costa Rica to the OECD Convention setting out the terms, conditions and process for its accession. OECD Secretary-General Angel Gurría said: "Launching the accession process of Costa Rica underlines the organisation's commitment to broaden its global outreach.  Our joint objective is to work together to bring Costa Rica's policies and practices closer to OECD best policies and practices. "Gurría, who hails from Mexico, added: "This process, through which standards and best practices are adopted, is as important as membership itself and will help improve the lives of all Costa Ricans.  It will be mutually enriching, as it will also allow the OECD to learn from Costa Rica's experience in various policy areas. "The first step in the process will see Costa Rica submit an initial memorandum setting out its position on approximately 260 OECD legal instruments.  This will in turn lead to a series of technical reviews by OECD experts, who will collect further information from Costa Rica through questionnaires and fact-finding missions. As part of the accession process, the OECD will evaluate Costa Rica's implementation of the organisation's policies, practices and legal instruments.  Its committees may make recommendations for adjustments to legislation, policy or practice to bring Costa Rica closer to OECD instruments or best practices, serving as a catalyst for reform. There is no deadline for completion of the accession processes, said an OECD official.  Final accession will depend on the candidate country's capacity to adapt and adjust to meet the organisation's standards.  Once all the committees have given their opinion, a final decision will be taken by all OECD member countries in the Governing Council. Created in 1961 as the successor to the Organisation for European Economic Cooperation, which administered the Marshall Plan at the end of the Second World War, OECD serves as an economic, environmental and social policy forum for its 34 member countries, as well as partners worldwide, on the world's most important global challenges. Edited by Phil Harris    