Mass migration will inevitably be part of human adaptation to  climate change, experts agree, since parts of the world will  become uninhabitable in the coming decades. Last year, 38 million people were displaced by climate-related  disasters such as the flooding in Pakistan and China. 'Human displacement due to climate change is happening now.  There is  no need to debate it,' Jonas Gahr Støre, Norway's minister of foreign  affairs, told over 200 delegates attending the Nansen Conference on  Climate Change and Displacement in the 21st Century in Oslo Jun.  6-7. Governments and the humanitarian community need to understand this  fact - and that it will get much worse in the coming decades, Støre  said. Without major emissions reductions, climate change could get far worse  than anyone is prepared to think about. 'It may be more realistic to consider four degrees C of warming rather  than two degrees C,' suggested Harald Dovland, former head of the  Norwegian Delegation to the United Nations climate change  negotiations. The world has already warmed 0. 8C and will rise to least 1. 6 C even if  all emissions of carbon and other greenhouse gases ended today, James  Hansen, head of NASA’s Goddard Institute for Space Studies, told the  conference. A four-degree C warmer world is a very different planet and risks  runaway climate change.  Even two degrees C is not safe, Hansen said. 'The last time the planet was two degrees C warmer was during the  Pliocene (five to 2. 4 million years ago) and sea levels were 25 metres  higher,' he said.  'If we burn all the fossil fuels (coal, oil, natural  gas) we're creating conditions that future generations will be unable  to cope with. 'Even though a four-degree C warmer world 'is choosing the suicidal  path', experts must avoid fuelling xenophobia with predictions of mass  migrations and conflicts, says Francois Gemenne, research fellow at  the Institute for Sustainable Development and International Relations  in Paris. 'This also feeds into a security agenda of panic and paranoia,'  Gemenne said. At least 20 percent of humanity will be at high risk of severe  flooding due to sea level rise and extreme rainfall events in the  coming decades. 'Too many people live in low-lying deltas and other parts of the world  that are becoming too dangerous to live in,' said Gemenne.  They will  be forced to move and often this movement will be permanent. Rather than building walls and barriers, countries and the  international community need to encourage people to move to safer  ground.  'Lift the barriers so that people can use migration to adapt  to climate change,' he urged delegates. In most cases, migration is the last choice when it comes to coping  with climate change.  No one wants to be forced to leave their home and  a great deal can be done to reduce the impacts of natural disasters,  Gemenne and others repeatedly said.  However, this is a new role for  the international development and humanitarian community. In 2010, new seasonal forecast tools accurately projected where the  floods and droughts were likely to be a month or two in advance in  parts of Africa and Asia, Madeleen Helmer, head of the Red Cross/Red  Crescent Climate Centre told the conference. 'We could not get a cent from the donor community to help poor  countries prepare,' Helmer said'They said: 'let's wait and see what happens',' Helmer said. Requests for funding to help prepare Mozambique for flooding went  unanswered prior to the devastating floods of 2000. 'Only 3. 4 million dollars was needed for preparation.  More than 98  million dollars ended up being spent on flood relief' illustrating the  fact that it is far more cost effective to prepare than react, said  Kelly David, head of the United Nations Office for the Coordination of  Humanitarian Affairs Regional Office of Southern and Eastern Africa. David and others urged a major shift away from a focus on disaster  assistance to adaptation and preparation.  That means that development,  including overseas development aidm needs to be part of this focus on  adaptation to avoid building a school that might be destroyed by a  future heavy rainfall event, for example. 'There has been a huge shift towards preparation by governments in  Africa very recently,' said David.  'They have become worried about  large-scale civil disruption such as those in the Middle East. 'Governments everywhere have been slow to realise the devastating human  and economic impacts of from climate-related disasters. 'These losses are accelerating and governments can't absorb those  losses anymore,' said Andrew Maskrey, coordinator of the Global  Assessment Report released in Oslo this week and earlier in Geneva by  the United Nations International Strategy for Disaster Reduction  Secretariat. The Global Assessment Report (GAR) reports that while there are fewer  deaths from flooding or cyclones in recent years, economic losses due  to climate-related disasters are crippling low-income countries. 'The sheer scale of recurrent and probable maximum losses should be  enough to shock governments into action,' the report concluded. Damage to Indonesia's schools and medical facilities has increased  1,000 percent in the last 20 years.  Mexico is now losing 10 billion  dollars worth of public infrastructure and assets annually due to  storms and flooding. 'Most governments don't know how much they're losing,' Maskrey told  IPS. Land use planning that accounts for the potential for climate-related  disasters is by the far the cheapest way to prevent these losses.   Relocation and retrofits will also work but are three to four times  more costly, he said. 'The number and sizes of losses are accelerating. . .  I hope we can  scale risk reduction to match what's coming,' Maskrey said. Development assistance is insufficient and organisations like the  World Bank and countries in the Organisation for Economic Cooperation  and Development are beginning to face the challenges of creating a  global framework to enhance resilience of the planet, said Nansen  conference chair Margareta Wahlström, United Nations Special  Representative of the Secretary-General for Disaster Risk Reduction. At the conference opening, Norway's Crown Princess Mette-Marit quoted  Fridtjof Nansen, this country's most famous citizen and the world's  first High Commissioner for Refugees: 'Charity is practical politics. '