One key component of the Plan B climate stabilisation strategy  is solar energy.  Solar is even more ubiquitous than wind  energy and can be harnessed with both solar photovoltaics (PV)  and solar thermal collectors. Solar PV - both silicon-based and thin film - converts sunlight  directly into electricity.  The growth in solar cell production climbed  from an annual expansion of 38 percent in 2006 to an off-the-chart 89  percent in 2008, before settling back to 51 percent in 2009. At the end of 2009, there were 23,000 megawatts of PV installations  worldwide, which when operating at peak power could match the output  of 23 nuclear power plants.  Germany, with an installed PV power  generating capacity of almost 10,000 megawatts, is far and away the  world leader in installations.  On the manufacturing front, the early leaders - the United States,  Japan, and Germany - have been overtaken by China, which produces more  than twice as many solar cells annually as Japan.  World PV production  has roughly doubled every two years since 2001 and exceeded 20,000  megawatts in 2010.  Historically, photovoltaic installations were small-scale - mostly  residential rooftop installations.  Now that is changing as utility- scale PV projects are being launched in several countries. The United States, for example, has under construction and development  some 77 utility-scale projects, adding up to 13,200 megawatts of  generating capacity.  Morocco is now planning five large solar- generating projects, either photovoltaic or solar thermal or both,  each ranging from 100 to 500 megawatts.  More and more countries, states, and provinces are setting solar  installation goals.  Italy's solar industry group is projecting 15,000  megawatts of installed capacity by 2020.  Japan is planning 28,000  megawatts by 2020.  The state of California has set a goal of 3,000  megawatts by 2017. Solar-rich Saudi Arabia recently announced that it plans to shift from  oil to solar energy to power new desalination plants that supply the  country's residential water.  It currently uses 1. 5 million barrels of  oil per day to operate some 30 desalting plants.  With installations of solar PV climbing, with costs continuing to  fall, and with concerns about climate change escalating, cumulative PV  installations could reach 1. 5 million megawatts (1,500 gigawatts) in  2020.  Although this estimate may seem overly ambitious, it could in  fact be conservative, because if most of the 1. 5 billion people who  lack electricity today get it by 2020, it will likely be because they  have installed home solar systems. In many cases, it is cheaper to install solar cells for individual  homes than it is to build a grid and a central power plant.  The second, very promising way to harness solar energy on a massive  scale is a large-scale solar thermal technology, often referred to as  concentrating solar power (CSP), that uses reflectors to concentrate  sunlight on a liquid, producing steam to drive a turbine and generate  electricity.  One of the attractions of utility-scale CSP plants is  that heat during the day can be stored in molten salt at temperatures  above 1,000 degrees Fahrenheit.  The heat can then be used to keep the  turbines running for eight or more hours after sunset.  CSP first came on the scene with the construction of a 350-megawatt  solar thermal power plant complex in California.  Completed in 1991, it  was the world's only utility-scale solar thermal generating facility  until the completion of a 64-megawatt power plant in Nevada in 2007.  Although solar thermal power has been slow to get under way, utility- scale plants are being built rapidly now, led by the United States and  Spain.  The United States has more than 40 solar thermal power plants  operating, under construction, and under development that range from  10 to 1,200 megawatts each.  Spain has 60 power plants in these same  stages of development, most of which are 50 megawatts each.  The  American Solar Energy Society notes that solar thermal resources in  the U. S.  Southwest can satisfy current U. S.  electricity needs nearly  four times over.  In July 2009, a group of 11 leading European firms and one Algerian  firm, led by Munich Re and including Deutsche Bank, Siemens, and ABB,  announced that they were going to craft a strategy and funding  proposal to develop solar thermal generating capacity in North Africa  and the Middle East.  Their proposal would meet the needs of the  producer countries and supply part of Europe's electricity via  undersea cable.  This initiative, known as the Desertec Industrial Initiative, could  develop 300,000 megawatts of solar thermal generating capacity - huge  by any standard.  Caio Koch-Weser, vice chair of Deutsche Bank, noted  that 'the Initiative shows in what dimensions and on what scale we  must think if we are to master the challenges from climate change. ' Even before this proposal, Algeria - for decades an oil exporter - was  planning to build 6,000 megawatts of solar thermal generating capacity  for export to Europe via undersea cable.  The Algerians note that they  have enough harnessable solar energy in their vast desert to power the  entire world economy.  This is not a mathematical error.  The German  government was quick to respond to the Algerian initiative.  The plan  is to build a 1,900-mile high-voltage transmission line from Adrar  deep in the Algerian desert to Aachen, a town on Germany's border with  the Netherlands.  At the global level, Greenpeace, the European Solar Thermal  Electricity Association, and the International Energy Agency's  SolarPACES programme have outlined a plan to develop 1. 5 million  megawatts of solar thermal power plant capacity by 2050. For Earth Policy Institute's Plan B to save civilisation, we suggest a  more immediate world goal of 200,000 megawatts by 2020, a goal that  may well be exceeded as the economic potential becomes clearer.  The pace of solar energy development is accelerating as the  installation of rooftop solar water heaters - solar thermal collectors  on a smaller scale - takes off.  This technology is sweeping China like  wildfire, with an estimated 1. 9 billion square feet of rooftop solar  thermal collectors installed, enough to supply 120 million Chinese  households with hot water. Other developing countries such as India and Brazil may also soon see  millions of households turning to this inexpensive water heating  technology.  Once the initial installment cost of rooftop solar water  heaters is paid back, the hot water is essentially free.  In Europe, where energy costs are relatively high, rooftop solar water  heaters are also spreading fast.  Systems typically pay for themselves  in electricity savings within 10 years.  In Austria, 15 percent of all  households now rely on them for hot water.  As in China, in some  Austrian villages nearly all homes have rooftop collectors.  And some  two million Germans are now living in homes where water and space are  both heated by rooftop solar systems.  The U. S.  rooftop solar water heating industry has historically  concentrated on a niche market - selling and marketing 100 million  square feet of solar water heaters for swimming pools between 1995 and  2005.  The industry was poised to mass-market residential solar water  and space heating systems when federal tax credits were introduced in  2006. Led by Hawaii, California, and Florida, annual U. S.  installation of  these systems has more than tripled since 2005.  The state of Hawaii  requires that all new single-family homes have rooftop solar water  heaters.  California aims to install 200,000 solar water heaters by  2017, and New York State aims to have 170,000 residential solar water  systems in operation by 2020.  With the cost of rooftop heating systems declining, many other  countries will likely join Israel, Spain, and Portugal in mandating  that all new buildings incorporate rooftop solar water heaters.   Worldwide, Plan B calls for a total of 1,100 thermal gigawatts of  rooftop solar water and space heating capacity by 2020.  Moving fast to harness the world's enormous solar potential would  bring a clear win for local economies and for the climate.  * Lester R.  Brown is founder and president of the Earth Policy  Institute.   Adapted from Brown's 'World on the Edge'.  Full book  available online at www. earth-policy. org/books/wote. 