After promising that the decision made by the outgoing fisheries minister on  commercial whaling would be reversed, the fisheries minister of Iceland's  caretaker government, Steingrimur J.  Sigfusson, discovered that the law would  not allow him to revoke the decision, and so whaling of up to 100 minke  whales and 150 fin whales can continue, at least for 2009. But Sigfusson added that if major problems come up, such as not being able  to sell the meat, the decision would be reconsidered.  One potential problem has already emerged.  Within hours of Sigfusson's  statement, Steingrimur Leifsson, director of the fish company Frostfiskur said  that their company would be badly affected.  The majority of their fish is sold  to Waitrose, a high-class supermarket chain in the UK that is particularly  aware of environmental issues and has high standards about where its food  comes from.  'A few weeks ago, soon after the outgoing fisheries minister, Einar K.   Gudfinnsson, made his decision about commercial whaling, we received a  letter from Waitrose saying that they would stop buying fish from Iceland if  commercial whaling goes ahead,' says Leifsson. 'This is particularly bad for us, as we send out fresh cod and haddock daily  to them, and get a good price for it.  We have 130 people working for the  company, and their jobs are at stake. 'Iceland has hunted whales to some extent since 2003.  Did Waitrose not  complain at that time? 'Yes, they made some remarks about it.  But the latest decision means  whaling will take place on a much larger scale,' says Leifsson.  He added: 'I  consider that Gudfinnsson was committing terrorism when he made the  commercial whaling decision. 'Another company that is affected is the exporting company Danica Seafood,  which exports fish from Icelandic companies to Waitrose.  Jan Thomsen,  managing director of Danica, told IPS: 'We have been supplying fish to  Waitrose for 10 years and have received a complaint from Waitrose about  Icelandic whaling.  We have told them that our suppliers are against the  whaling decision, and that seems to have worked for the time being.  We are  also pressuring Icelandic government officials on the subject, which seems to  be going well. ' Frostfiskur exports via Danica.  However, Sigurdur Sverrisson, information officer at the Federation of  Icelandic Fishing Vessel Owners (FIFVO), has a different viewpoint.  'The letter  from Waitrose was misinterpreted.  It says that they will 'potentially stop  buying fish', nothing more. ' Is it possible that different letters were sent to Frostfiskur and to the  Icelandic government? Jess Hughes, Press Officer for Waitrose, told IPS: 'There was only one letter.   Our specialist fish buyer wrote (to Iceland) to outline the close and long-term  relationship between Waitrose and Iceland and to encourage the  consideration of our customers' beliefs in the decision-making process  regarding whaling in Iceland.   As outlined in the letter, Waitrose and our  customers are against whaling. 'Nevertheless, according to Hughes, Waitrose still buys fish from Norway and  the Faeroe Islands, which are whaling nations.  Protests have also come from Germany.  Arthur Bjorgvin Bollason, news  correspondent for the Icelandic National Broadcasting Service in Germany,  told IPS: 'I know that the embassy here in Berlin has received letters from  environmental organisations, saying that they may organise a boycott of  Icelandic products.  Similar letters have also been sent to public officials in  Iceland. 'In the 1980s, German environmentalists organised a boycott of Icelandic  goods when commercial whaling in Iceland was still happening.  'As a result,  Germany's  Tengelmann supermarket chain stopped buying Icelandic  products, which caused considerable damage in Iceland, not least to prawn  suppliers.  There were even cases where prawn companies went bankrupt  because of the ban,' says Bollason. Asta Einarsdottir is a lawyer at the Ministry of Fisheries who is working on  the whaling issue.  She confirms that the ministry has received complaints  from Waitrose, and also from Marks & Spencer.  Asked whether the  complaints and the prospect of a boycott of Icelandic products might be  grounds to change the legislation yet again, she said that it was impossible  to say anything at the moment.  'However, I am preparing new whaling legislation that should be put before  the Althingi (parliament) before it dissolves, which might give more flexibility  to the issue,' she added.  The current whaling legislation goesback to 1949.   Some overseas buyers had also expressed concern after Gudfinnsson decided  to increase the cod quota for this year by 30,000 tonnes, from 130,000  tonnes.  They were concerned that Icelanders would be exploiting their cod  reserves and that the fishing would no longer be sustainable. Leifsson says that a Waitrose official had come out to Iceland and visited the  Marine Research Institute, where he had been reassured that the increased  quota would not have a particularly adverse affect on the cod population.  It  just meant that the cod population would increase more slowly than  expected.  'I don't think the extra quota will be used anyway, as fish sales have slowed  and fish is basically only being caught to fulfil orders,' says Sigurdur  Sverrisson from FIFVO. Whaling will probably start at the beginning of June.   