The alarm bells this time are not being rung by climate scientists or by  environmental activists.  They are being rung by none other than the International  Energy Agency (IEA) - the institution established in the 1970s to defend the  interests of Western oil consuming nations. On May 30, the IEA issued a press release that sent shock waves through the Western world.  According  to the release, global emissions of carbon dioxide (CO2) have reached their highest levels ever in 2010. Although following the financial crisis emission levels in 2009 temporarily dipped, in 2010 they are  calculated to have been 30. 6 gigatonnes.  For the layperson, the implications of this figure may not  immediately be evident, but the figure squarely indicates that exponential growth in CO2 emissions has  not been stopped by the joint international initiatives taken since the 1990s. Accumulation has continued up until today.  A decade back, in 2000, the level of emissions was  probably about 23 gigatonnes.  This means that over the last ten years alone annual emission levels  have increased by a staggering 25 percent! Hence, the IEA’s chief economist, Fatih Birol, is sounding the  alarm, stating: 'Our latest estimates are another wake-up call.  The world has edged incredibly close to  the level of emissions that should not be reached until 2020, if the two degree Celsius target is to be  attained. 'Global leaders agreed a target of limiting temperature increase to two degrees Celsius at the U. N.   climate change talks in Cancun in 2010. How do we assess the implications of the IEA’s assessment of humanity’s efforts to avert a climate  catastrophe? Prominent climate scientists have for years been debating what target humanity should set  for itself.  What maximum level of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere is permissible if runaway climate  change is to be averted? Many scientists have been pushing for the target to be set at 350 parts per  million - meaning that the presence of greenhouse gas molecules in the world’s atmosphere should not  exceed 350 molecules per million molecules of atmospheric air. Significantly, when the Copenhagen Summit was held in December of 2009, it witnessed a growing  consensus among a majority of nations that the precautionary advice of climate scientists should be  taken to heart, and that the target of a 1. 5 degree Celsius cap should be maintained.  Hence, critics  reading the IEA press release will react or retort that the agency is not sounding alarm bells as loudly as  it should - for it is still working on the presumption that a two degree Celsius target is defendable. James Hansen, one of the world’s foremost climate archaeologists, has become internationally  renowned, amongst others because in his scientific papers and publicity work he takes account of the  evolution which the earth’s climate has undergone during the many hundreds of millions of years  before human civilisation arose.  Hansen puts forth data on the situation that prevailed three million  years ago.  At that time the earth was two or three degrees warmer than it is today - and it was a  different planet, with sea levels not just higher than they are now, but a staggering 25 metres higher!The lower sea levels since civilisation arose have led to the building of human settlements in coastal  areas previously flooded or covered by ice.  The sea level difference is, of course, basically explained by  the existence today of huge ice sheets - notably the Antarctic and the Greenland ice sheets. Hansen argues that - unlike previously believed - the Antarctic and Greenland ice sheets won’t take  thousands of years to melt.  They will disintegrate rapidly once danger points are reached.  Hence, the  American scientist maintains that 'a two degree Celsius global warming, or even a 1. 7 degree warming,  is a disaster scenario'. Clearly, given the IEA’s data on 2010 CO2 emissions at hand, Hansen would ring shrieking, not soft  alarm bells. What policy-consequences should be drawn from the IEA’s revelations? So far the two key paths the  world’s policymakers have followed to stem the exponential growth in emissions have been ineffectual.   These are the paths of ‘technological’ and of ‘market-based’ fixes. Here it is striking that the IEA’s chief economist continues to express a holy belief in technological  fixes. When releasing the IEA’s data on CO2 missions, Birol advocated - of all technological fixes - continued  reliance on nuclear energy.  This is surprising because any expansion in capital-intensive nuclear  production requires many years to accomplish - doing very little to prevent exponential growth of CO2  emissions in the short-term. What’s worse is that both nuclear production and reliance on fossil fuels result in forms of waste that  are inescapable - meaning that they represent a dead-end for humanity.  This is not to deny there are  great differences between the two types of waste.  Greenhouse gases such as CO2 exist in nature - they  have only become damaging due to their extremely high levels produced under the industrial system  that is based on fossil fuels, i. e.  on coal, oil and gas.  On the other hand, many of the radioactive  elements in nuclear waste do not exist in nature, but emerge as by-products when nuclear energy is  generated. Both fossil fuels and the nuclear production chain threaten to saddle humanity with consequences that  can’t be undone.  In case of nuclear waste: the half-life of radiation in thorium-230, in plutonium-242  and in jodium-129 respectively lasts 76 thousand, 380 thousand and over 15 million years!If a technological fix via the expansion of nuclear production is questionable - what about a ‘market- based’ fix to solve the problem of climate change? Here it might be too early to close the debate.  Yet  the IEA’s announcement regarding CO2 emissions in 2010 raises big questions regarding market-based  approaches to avert run-away climate change. Under the Kyoto climate change treaty of 1997 policymakers set concrete targets towards reducing  global emissions of CO2.  To stem their exponential growth, obligatory reductions were agreed on.  The  main practical measures proposed to achieve reduction targets were market-based.  They entailed  making CO2 wastes tradable - which in effect transferred responsibility for storage of CO2 to countries  of the Global South. Perhaps the historical lesson to be drawn from the IEA’s announcement is that the time for market- based experiments is over.  Humanity can no longer afford to continue with failed experiments. From common sense, to avert a climate catastrophe, we need to rapidly embark on a different, a more  ‘radical’ path. Compelled by Hansen’s scientific analysis and the IEA’s historic, if defective, announcement, I venture  to suggest that the Global South needs to insist on a new approach to avert a climate catastrophe. Why not propose that the Western world agrees to help enforce global rationing of energy access? Why  not demand from the West that it help institute a worldwide system of energy rationing that is both  equitable to the world’s poor and to vulnerable nations? Why not and put a permanent and strict cap on  overall emissions?*(Dr.  Peter Custers is author of a theoretical study on nuclear production, Questioning Globalized  Militarism, Tulika/Merlin Press, 2011. )