Canada was roundly criticised by other nations at a major U. N.   climate meeting last week after being caught underreporting  carbon emissions from its tar sands oil production facilities,  one of the country's biggest and fastest growing sources of  global warming gases. But even the 'full emissions' data that Canada finally released  represents only about half of the actual emissions, according to a  new report. 'Small oil sands companies are not required to report their  emissions.  And oil-refining emissions are not included in tar sands  emissions,' said independent Canadian researcher Michelle Mech. Canada likes to claim the city-sized tar sands project in the western  province of Alberta represents only five percent of the country's  entire emissions, but the real number is closer to 10 percent, Mech  told IPS. Getting oil out of the tar sands requires extraordinary efforts,  including enormous amounts of energy, and has been labeled 'dirty  oil' as a result. 'Average emissions for oil sands production and upgrading (well-to- pump) are estimated to be 3. 2 to 4. 5 times as carbon intensive as  conventional crude produced in North America,' concluded Mech's  report, 'A Comprehensive Guide to the Alberta Oil Sands'. 'The tar sands are huge in terms of their impact on the environment  but also on Canadian democracy.  Oil is starting to run the country  now,' she said. As if to prove that assertion, the Canadian government informed  nearly 200 countries participating in the United Nations Framework  Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) negotiating session here last  week that it would not sign on to a new Kyoto agreement to reduce  carbon emissions. Canada signed the original Kyoto treaty in 1997, committing it to  reduce the country's emissions six percent below its emission levels  in 1990.  In 2008, Canadian emissions were at least 24 percent greater  than in 1990.  The latest reporting year is 2009, but that data is in  dispute as the Canadian government has admitted omitting a 20-percent  rise in emissions from the tar sands. Civil society attending the Bonn negotiations gave Canada a 'fossil  of the day' award on Friday for doing 'its best to block  negotiations' to create an international binding agreement to reduce  climate-damaging emissions last week. 'Canada's track record of climate inaction shows that they need a  binding target more than anyone,' the Climate Action Network (CAN), a  worldwide network of roughly 700 non-governmental organisations  (NGOs), said in a release. Canada has the dubious honour of receiving more 'fossil awards' than  any other country in the last few years. 'Oil companies are in the driver's seat when it comes to Canadian  federal energy policy, and as a result Canada is trailing other  industrialised countries when it comes to taking action on climate  change,' said Graham Saul of Climate Action Network Canada. 'Prime Minister Harper has made it clear that he will go to great  lengths to ensure no door is closed to the Alberta tar sands,  including lobby efforts to insulate them from more stringent  regulations imposed by other countries,' Saul said in a statement.   'Governments are acting as if they are oblivious to the fact that  there is a limit on how much fossil fuel carbon we can put into the  air,' warned world-renowned climate scientist James Hansen.  Hansen  told IPS that fully exploiting the tar sands will make it impossible  to stabilise the climate. Burning just one-quarter of the proven reserves of oil, gas and coal  will push the global climate beyond two degrees C of global warming,  scientists have previously reported.  Hansen said the international  target to limit global warming to two degrees C is 'a recipe for  global climate disasters' and should be changed to 1. 5 degrees C. Billions of dollars are being invested Canada's tar sands by major  oil companies from around the world pushing to expand beyond the  current production of 2. 7 million barrels day.  Meanwhile, most of  Canada's emission reduction programmes have or will expire this year. The negotiations in Bonn nearly expired last week after delegates  spent days debating the agenda.  'Taxpayers in developed countries must be outraged that their  bureaucrats are coming here and playing tricks,' said Meena Raman, a  negotiations analyst with Friends of the Earth Malaysia. The Bonn negotiations are supposed to work out the details for an  agreement that will be presented to government ministers at the 17th  Conference of the Parties under the UNFCCC in Durban, South Africa in  late November.  Earlier talks in Bangkok in April made little progress  except to make clear that current emission reduction pledges from  developed and developing nations were far too low to achieve the two- degree C target. What's utterly absent here is any sense of urgency from any of the  developed nations, said Mohamed Adow, senior advisor for Global  Climate Advocacy at Christian Aid in East Africa.  'Some nation needs  to raise the alarm and push everyone hard towards meeting their  emission reductions targets,' Adow said at a press conference last  Friday. 'We can't keep taking carbon out of the ground and putting it in the  atmosphere if we want to leave our children with a stable climate,'  stressed David Keith, Canada Research Chair in Energy and the  Environment at the University of Calgary, who reviewed and commented  on Mech's tar sands report. Referencing the tar sands, Keith concluded: 'This means there is no  such thing as sustainable production of this resource.  In the long  run, it must be shut down. '