Clean the air, cool the planet and prevent millions of deaths  with fast action on soot and smog, a new report urges. Air pollutants like black carbon (soot) and ground-level ozone (smog)  arise from incomplete combustion of fossil fuels and biomass like wood  and charcoal. Nations or regional blocks of nations could decide to put measures  into place that quickly improve their air quality, reduce crop losses  and shorten lives.  And, almost as a side benefit, those efforts would  do much to slow the rate of global warming, says the scientific  assessment report released at the United Nations Framework Convention  on Climate Change (UNFCCC) negotiating session here in Bonn. 'One-third of current global warming is due to emissions of black  carbon, methane and ground-level ozone,' said Joseph Alcamo, chief  scientist at the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP). This comprehensive scientific assessment shows that reducing emissions  of these pollutants is a powerful adjunct to efforts to reduce  emissions of carbon dioxide, Alcamo said in a press conference. If the global community fully implements clean-up measures, it could  reduce future climate change by 0. 5 degrees C by 2030 to 2040, the  report concludes.  This is a key ingredient in the extraordinary  challenge of keeping global temperatures from rising beyond two  degrees C, says report co-author Johan Kuylenstierna, York Centre  Director of the Stockholm Environment Institute. The scientists behind the assessment, coordinated by the United  Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) and the World Meteorological  Organization (WMO), also point to numerous public health and food  security opportunities.  Ground-level ozone and fine particles,  including black carbon, are linked with premature deaths, primarily  heart disease and lung cancer, alongside other illnesses such as  bronchitis and low birth weight. Both ground-level ozone and black carbon can also substantially reduce  the growth of crops, trees and other plants.  Implementing the measures  in the report could avoid annual yield losses of up to 50 million  tonnes annually, they estimate. 'The (clean-up) measures to do this all exist and are in use in many  places.  They need to be implemented very widely in order to get the  full climate benefit,' Kuylenstierna told IPS. Black carbon or soot arises from inefficient burning of fossil fuels  and biomass like wood and charcoal.  To tackle those emissions, the  report, 'Integrated Assessment of Black Carbon and Tropospheric  Ozone', recommends wide use of filters on diesel engines to trap these  particles. It also recommends removing older, highly-polluting diesel vehicles  and engines.  Replacing cook stoves and kilns with new clean-burning  versions will dramatically improve indoor and outdoor quality, it  said. Ground-level or tropospheric ozone, more commonly known as smog,  results from emissions of methane, nitrogen oxides and other products  of combustion.  Tropospheric ozone is a powerful global warming gas and  main measures to reduce its formation include capturing methane  emitted from landfill sites, the production and transport of coal, oil  and gas and to a lesser extent livestock, the report recommends.  Encouraging composting is one low-cost solution to reducing landfill  emissions, although the capture of methane for use as an energy source  is becoming more widespread. 'In some Indian cities, diesel buses have been converted to use  natural gas,' said Surya Sethi, a negotiator with the delegation from  India. 'The conversion to cleaner-burning cook stoves has not happened to any  great extent,' Sethi said.  The costs and the lack of effective  programmes to bring these to rural areas as well as institutional  inertia are some of the barriers to implementation, he added. With the significant benefit for global climate protection documented  in the report, Sethi said he is hopeful these measures will receive a  higher priority and access to new international funding. Kuylenstierna does not see efforts to reduce soot and smog as part of  the UNFCCC process.  Black carbon and ground-level ozone cause global  warming but their effects are measured in days or months, whereas  carbon dioxide emitted today will continue to warm the atmosphere for  centuries. Perhaps more importantly, the painfully slow pace of these  international climate treaty negotiations make them an inappropriate  forum for pollutants with 'impacts that are local and here and now',  he said. A regional approach would work best, he suggested.  Southeast Asian  nations could work together to implement these measures, since the  entire region would benefit.  Black carbon is known to be affecting the  timing of the monsoon and speeding the ice melt in the Himalayan  Mountains, a critical water source for the region, he said. None of these measures are new.  Many have been talked about for years  but widespread implementation - tens of thousands of stoves becoming  tens of millions - has largely not happened.  In hopes of changing  this, a follow-up report will be issued at the Conference of Parties  meeting in Durban, South Africa in late November. 'This is a very convincing science report,' said Emi Hijino, head of  the Sweden's climate delegation. 'We would like to announce our support for the development of an  action plan on how to implement the recommended measures,' she said. That effort will involve a policy assessment and make 'policy-relevant  recommendations' for implementation on a regional basis to assist  governments in taking the next steps towards fast action on these air  pollutants, Hijino concluded. 