Providing electricity and modern cooking technology to billions of ‘energy poor’  people worldwide is one of the priorities of the U. N. ’s Millennium Development  Goals (MDGs) - one that experts say is achievable over the next few decades. From Jun.  21 to 23, the United Nations Industrial Development Organisation (UNIDO) will be hosting the  Vienna Energy Forum, a major initiative aimed at combating energy poverty. Mikhail Evstafyev, advocacy and communications coordinator of UNIDO, spoke to IPS about how  resource-efficient and low-carbon industries could help the 2 billion people around the globe living  without electricity. Q: How can we reach the world’s energy poor at an affordable and accessible cost?  A: The financial implications of ensuring universal energy access are large, but not overwhelming when  weighed against the enormous benefits. The International Energy Agency estimates that, over the next two decades, ensuring universal access to  electricity would require around 10 percent of total annual investment in the energy sector, which could  be mobilised by the private sector. Universal energy access is a new market opportunity, but one that needs the right support to thrive. Many clean technologies are already available, so we are not talking about investing billions in research.   It is a question of transferring the technologies and adapting them to local conditions and needs. But increasing energy access is not only about supplying better, more efficient cooking stoves or light  bulbs.  To promote economic development and growth, energy services must also work in the interest of  creating wealth and jobs by providing power for businesses and improving healthcare, education, and  transportation. Q: What has UNIDO accomplished in recent years concerning poverty reduction and  environmental sustainability?  A: Over the past 45 years, UNIDO has been providing specialised services to promote sustainable  industrial development, concerning poverty reduction and environmental sustainability.  This is also  reflected in our three thematic priorities - poverty reduction through productive activities; trade  capacity building; and energy and environment. Through its analytical and policy advice function, UNIDO helps developing countries transition to a low  carbon economy.  As a global forum, UNIDO generates and disseminates knowledge while providing a  platform for dialogue and cooperation.  As part of its normative functions, UNIDO supports the  development of global standards, designs and implements specialised, tailor-made programmes and  projects to assist citizens of developing countries and nationals of economies in transition. Q: What are your expectations regarding the outcome of the Vienna Energy Forum (VEF)?  A: The Vienna Energy Forum will bring together heads of state, policy-makers, experts, civil society and  the private sector to discuss how to overcome energy poverty and how to move from declarations of  intention to tangible action on the ground.  Former Governor of California Arnold Schwarzenegger, and  business magnate and philanthropist, Carlos Slim, will also speak at the event. VEF will facilitate a dialogue on how to provide universal energy access and on the multiple co-benefits  of increasing energy efficiency.  VEF will look at ways to agree on a common understanding of energy  access, and on a strategy to ensure universal access to modern energy services.  Participants will also  discuss how to increase energy efficiency… and prioritise key national and regional actions on energy  access and energy efficiency. The discussion on these topics will serve to propose an international architecture on how to ensure  universal energy access.  It will help map the related work of key stakeholders and define their roles and  responsibilities.  Based on this mapping, the development of an action-oriented roadmap will be  initiated. Our partner organisation, the International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis, will  launch a Global  Energy Assessment. Q: What countries have achieved success promoting environmental sustainability in recent  years?  A: A number of countries in the developing world are showing results in environmental sustainability. UNIDO and the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) are contributing to improving resource  efficiency through cleaner production centres in China, India, Vietnam, Laos, Cambodia, Pakistan, Sri  Lanka and the Republic of Korea, among others. Overall, there have been significant gains made by Asia in moving towards resource-efficient and low- carbon industries over the years.  But more needs to be done especially since resource use in the region  continues to increase in absolute terms with the region’s continuing economic growth. China has emerged as a major producer of solar photovoltaics and wind turbines.  India increased its  renewable energy target to 14-gigawatt renewable capacity by 2012.  It has also adopted a National  Action Plan for Climate Change that aims to protect the poor and the vulnerable through an inclusive  and sustainable development strategy that is sensitive to climate change.  And new policies are leading  to 18 billion dollars of new manufacturing investment. Q: After the crisis in Japan, some countries aim to move away from nuclear energy.  Can that  be done and how?  A: I am sure that in the future, when renewable energy sources become more affordable and  universalised, we will see this happening.  The Vienna Energy Forum 2011 will address the gamut of  energy challenges including those from nuclear to renewable energy.  This is why BBC will film a World  Debate on energy under the theme ‘How do we power the 21st century?’ during the forum. Q: Is it the role of developed countries to assist low-income countries in catching up to the  green economy?  A: Of course, developing countries need our help.  And it can be delivered in different ways, including  via intergovernmental agencies such as UNIDO.  However, in recent years this has also been  complemented by South-South cooperation as most poor countries have similar conditions and face the  same sort of challenges. Interesting enough, the world’s least developed countries, or LDCs, which have low-carbon profiles and  rich natural assets, are better placed than industrialised countries to make their economies more  environmentally sustainable because they are less dependent on fossil fuel-based technologies,  according to a recent U. N.  report. The report, ‘Why a Green Economy Matters for the Least Developed Countries’,  shows that new  opportunities offered by a green economy will help LDCs meet their Millennium Development Goals  (MDGs), the internationally agreed poverty reduction and social development targets that have a 2015  deadline. Structural constraints, including dependence on fragile agriculture, limited access to energy and low  economic diversification - which have previously prevented LDCs from significantly reducing poverty  and achieving higher rates of development - resulted from investments and policies that undervalued  the importance of the economic sectors most relevant to the livelihoods of the poor. 