The first-ever official meeting of Ministers of Agriculture from G20 countries, to  be held in Paris Jun.  22-23, presents an extraordinary opportunity.  Tasked with  developing an action plan to address price volatility in food and agricultural  markets and its impact on the poor, the ministers are uniquely positioned to not  only tackle the immediate price volatility problems, but also to take on a more  fundamental and long-term challenge - extreme poverty and hunger. As experts in agriculture, the ministers no doubt know what extensive research confirms: Investing in  agriculture and rural development, with a focus on smallholder farmers, is the best bet for achieving  global food security, alleviating poverty, and improving human wellbeing in developing countries.   During their upcoming meeting, the G20 ministers should seize the opportunity to call attention to this  essential fact and propose a corresponding plan of action. Three years after the 2008 food crisis, expanding biofuel production, rising oil prices, U. S.  dollar  depreciation, extreme weather, and export restrictions have once again led to high and volatile food  prices, threatening the wellbeing of the world’s poorest consumers, who spend up to 70 percent of their  incomes on food.  Any plan to curb volatility and protect the poor will require decisive action on a  number of fronts, including measures to control speculation on agricultural commodities, promote open  trade and export bans, establish emergency food reserves, curtail biofuels subsidies, and strengthen  social safety nets, especially for women and young children. In addition to these critical steps, achieving food security requires long-term investments to increase  the productivity, sustainability, and resiliency of agriculture, especially among smallholder farmers,  many of whom live in absolute poverty and are malnourished.  Millions of poor, smallholder farmers  struggle to raise output on tiny plots of degraded land, far from the nearest market.  Lacking access to  decent tools, quality seeds, credit, and agricultural extension, and being highly susceptible to the  vagaries of weather, they work hard but reap little. These challenges, however, are not insurmountable, and many actually present opportunities.  Successes  during the Green Revolution in Asia and more recent accomplishments in Africa show that rapid  increases in crop productivity among smallholder farmers can be achieved, helping to feed millions of  people.  When smallholder farmers have equal access to agricultural services, inputs, and technologies,  including high-yielding seeds, affordable fertiliser, and irrigation, they have often proven to be at least  as efficient as larger farms. Exploiting the vast potential of small-scale agriculture would increase productivity and incomes where  they are most needed - Sub-Saharan Africa and South Asia.  The two regions are not only home to the  majority of smallholder farmers and people suffering from extreme poverty, hunger, and malnutrition,  but they also have rapidly growing populations.  Improving smallholder agriculture could take pressure  off global food and agricultural markets and cushion the negative impact on poor people who are most  vulnerable to volatile markets. Harnessing the promise of smallholder farmers, however, will require concerted action in a number of  areas.  First, investments that improve farmers’ productivity - such as better access to high-quality  seeds, fertiliser, and extension and financial services - should be increased along with spending on  roads and other rural infrastructure to improve farmers’ access to markets.  Investments in agricultural  research should focus on new agricultural technologies that are well suited for smallholder farmers, as  well as other innovations, including insurance schemes that can reduce the risk small-scale farmers  face due to extreme weather and high price volatility. Second, while increasing productivity and incomes is crucial, it is not sufficient.  Agricultural  development among smallholders should also improve nutrition and health.  Growing more nutritious  varieties of staple crops that have higher levels of micronutrients like vitamin A, iron, and zinc can  potentially reduce death and disease, especially of women and children.  Producing more diverse crops,  especially fruits and vegetables, can also help to combat malnutrition, and selling more nutritious food  could increase incomes and provide additional employment. Third, since smallholder farmers are extremely vulnerable to weather shocks, including escalating  threats from global warming, promoting climate change adaptation and mitigation is important to  protect against risks and potential crop loss.  With the right incentives and technologies, smallholder  farmers can invest in mitigation efforts, including managing their land to increase carbon storage.  Sub- Saharan Africa, for example, has 17 percent of the world’s potential for climate change mitigation  through sustainable agricultural practices. Finally, policies and programs need to narrow the gender gap in agriculture and address the specific  constraints faced by women.  Although female farmers do much of the work to produce, process, and  sell food in many countries, they frequently have less access than men to land, seeds, fertiliser, credit,  and training.  When women obtain the same levels of education and have equal access to extension and  farm inputs, they produce significantly higher yields. When the G20 Ministers of Agriculture develop an action plan to address food price volatility and its  impact on the poor, they should focus on both urgent actions and the vital role of smallholder farmers.   But before the international community issues any new recommendations, they first need to make good  on previous commitments, including the G8’s L’Aquila pledge in 2009 to invest 22 billion dollars in  agriculture, which must be targeted to small-scale farmers.  When it comes to achieving food security  and reducing poverty, poor farmers in developing countries might be part of the challenge, but they are  definitely indispensable to the solution. *Shenggen Fan, is the director-general of the International Food Policy Research Institute (IFPRI) in  Washington, D. C.  IFPRI is one of nine international organisations, including the World Bank and the  Organisation of Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) that contributed to a report on price  volatility of food and other agricultural commodities for consideration by the G20 summit later this  month in France.  It is also one of 15 centres supported by the Consultative Group on International  Agricultural Research, an alliance of 64 governments, private foundations, and international and  regional organisations. 