If we're lucky, by the time a tough but fair international  treaty to meet the climate change challenge is finalised, it  will be largely unnecessary.  The snail's pace of negotiations  certainly gives countries plenty of time to understand the  financial, social and environmental advantages of kicking  their dangerous addiction to fossil fuels. That may be a cynical optimist's hope, but the European Union is  already moving in that direction. 'Climate change is now seen as an opportunity to deal with the  economic downturn in Europe,' said Jürgen Lefevere, a European  Commission negotiator at the United Nations Framework Convention on  Climate Change (UNFCCC) negotiating session that ended late Friday in  Bonn. 'It is no longer just an environmental issue for us,' Lefevere said  at a final press conference. China also understands the opportunity. Renewable energy sources like wind and solar now account for 11. 4  percent of China's electricity, and that figure will be 20 percent by  2020, says Liu Qiang, a researcher at the Energy Research Institute  of NDRC, China. 'China takes this very seriously,' Qiang said, noting that there are  significant investments and research in smarter electrical grids and  energy storage in China. Looking to 2050, the era of fossil fuels will be over in a world of  vibrant economies and societies powered entirely by clean, cheap and  renewable energy, says Niklas Hoehne, director of Energy and Climate  Policy at Ecofys, an energy consulting company based in the  Netherlands. 'The cost is about two to three percent of global GDP (gross domestic  product) from now until 2035, and then the costs decline,' said  Hoehne, a co-author of the Ecofys technical study called 'The Energy  Report', which demonstrates how the world could reach 100 percent  renewable energy by 2050. That investment is far less than the costs of climate change will be  without major reductions in emissions, he told IPS. It seems that few nations at these climate negotiations understand  the full extent of the calamity the human species and planet face.   Negotiators from 190 nations spent the last two weeks attempting to  work out the details for an international agreement to be presented  to government ministers at the 17th Conference of the Parties under  the UNFCCC in Durban, South Africa in late November. They made some progress on technical issues but it seems unlikely  there will be a new international treaty for some years yet. 'If developed countries don't increase their reduction targets to 40  percent by 2020 without offsets, they are risking five [degrees] C of  warming and a planetary emergency,' said Asad Rehman, head of the  International Climate programme at Friends of the Earth. At five C, Africa will burn and low-lying areas where hundreds of  millions live will be underwater, representatives of civil society  reminded delegates time and again.  And it is likely even worse than  that.  Human civilisation has arisen and thrived during a time of  little change in global temperature.  The current temperature increase  of 0. 8 degrees C is only about half of what is now guaranteed even if  all emissions ended today. Even a 1. 5 to 2. 0 C temperature rise puts humanity effectively on a  new planet, with a different climate than we have prospered in.   Additional warming not only further threatens that prosperity it  bring us far too close to the nightmare scenario of runaway climate  change that will threaten our very survival, experts warn. No developed country is close to the 40-percent cut that the science  says is needed by 2020 to stay below two degrees C. The European Union's emission reductions are already nearly 20  percent and it could easily reach 30 percent by 2020.  However, the  rest of the developed nations are far behind, with many like Canada,  Australia and the United States continuing to increase their  emissions, not reduce them. All industrial nations made additional reduction pledges in the 2009  Copenhagen Accord 2020, but these are not nearly enough.  And many  countries now insist they cannot be held legally accountable for  those pledges. 'You can't negotiate with the Earth's natural limits.  At the moment,  emission reduction pledges take us far over those limits,' said Sivan  Kartha of the Stockholm Environment Institute in a release. Negotiations between nations are extremely difficult because there is  little trust by the global South that pledges by the North will be  honoured.  Canada's Stephen Harper government simply said it would not  live up to its legal emissions reduction obligations under the Kyoto  Protocol that a previous administration had signed in 1997.  And it  declared here it would not agree to another. Japan, Russia and the U. S.  have taken similar positions. Pledges by countries of the North are hardly ever fulfilled, says  Augustine Njamnshi, Central Africa coordinator of the Pan African  Climate Justice Alliance involving more than 300 African civil  society groups.  That is why developing countries are insisting on a  second, legally binding phase under the Kyoto Protocol - and with  much greater reduction targets than the five percent of the first  Kyoto.  However, there are no real teeth in the agreement to punish those  that fail or, like Canada, refuse to meet their obligations. 'These are the most important negotiations the world has ever faced,'  Christiana Figueres, executive secretary of the UNFCCC, reminded  journalists at the closing press conference in response to questions  about the lack of progress and difficult issues deferred to yet  another meeting likely this September.  'We face two realities side by side,' she said.  'One is the science  that emissions peak in 2015 and then decline.  The other is the  political reality of what is possible. 'The 'magic' of the UNFCCC process is to hold these realities in each  hand and keep struggling forward as it has for 17 years, she said. Bolivia, the self-appointed defender of climate science and the  rights of Mother Earth, says the world's leaders need to get together  to talk about how to close 'the emissions gap' between what has been  pledged and what is necessary to keep global temperatures from rising  more than two degrees C. 'There can be no success in Durban without the developed world  agreeing to greater emission reductions,' said Ambassador Pablo Solon  of the Plurinational State of Bolivia. 'There has been no movement on the big issue of reducing emissions  but instead a proliferation of proposals on new market mechanisms,'  Solon said at a press conference.  He warned that many of these new  markets will amount to nothing more than 'hot air' involving lots of  money but no real carbon cuts. 'We don't want just any agreement, only what will get us below two  [degrees] C,' he stressed. 