On a blazingly hot summer’s day in Cairo, it’s 36 degrees Celsius in the shade.   Air-conditioners and fans whirr across the city, burdening the national  electricity grid.  Last summer, the populous city experienced frequent water and  power cuts, causing a furore.  Consumption had grown by 2,600 megawatts, an  increase of 13,5 percent from 2009. Over 1,000 years ago ancient Egyptians worshipped the sun god Ra.  Centuries later, modern Egypt is  only just beginning to realise the importance of utilising the sun as an energy source.  One of the most  sunlight-rich countries in the world, this North African country is making slow strides with solar  energy. About 100 km south of Cairo lies Kuraymat, Egypt’s first solar plant, which is expected to produce 120  MW.  A hybrid power plant, 20 MW will be from solar energy and 100 MW from natural gas.   Initially  expected to start up in Dec.  2010, its activation has been postponed several times.  The Jan.  25 uprising  further stalled the launch.  'Foreign partners on the project left and we couldn’t continue', says Khaled Fekry, director of research  and development at the New and Renewable Energy Authority (NREA), a government body.  German  companies Ferrostaal and Flagsol, a subsidiary of Solar Millenium, provided the technology.  Currently, Kuraymat is in the final stage of commissioning, with tests being carried out.  Fekry hopes it  will be ready at the end of June. A second 100 MW plant in Kom Ombo was announced last July and should be completed in 2017.  Fekry  lists other projects: 'We aim to develop a 200 MW plant for cement factories and a 1,000 MW plant for  the private sector.  ' This is all very ambitious but ties in with Egypt’s plan of producing 20 percent of energy output from  renewable sources by 2020.  Solar energy will provide a third, or 7,200 MW, of that percentage.  Fekry is  confident it can be achieved. While large-scale projects won’t have a direct effect on Egyptians just yet, a joint undertaking by NREA  and the Italian ministry of environment has changed the lives of villagers living deep in the Western  Desert.  The villages of Ain Zahra and Umm al Saghir, not connected to the national energy grid, have  had their homes, schools, mosques and hospitals electrified with photovoltaic (PV) solar energy since  Dec.  2010. NREA engineers have remained on site, providing training to the villagers.  Six months in, Fekry reports,  there have been no complaints.  But Mohab Hallouda, senior energy specialist at the World Bank’s Egypt office, explains that, although  PV energy is suitable for outlying areas, 'the price must decline to be a viable alternative to electricity  from the grid'. Away from the bureaucracy of government-led proposals, a simple concept, SolarCITIES, is empowering  residents of local communities.  Darb el Ahmar and Manshiet Nasser are two of Cairo’s poorest areas.  Crumbling buildings are built close together, lining narrow streets and jostling with animal, vehicle and  pedestrian traffic.  Many residents cannot afford heating appliances and boil water on kerosene stoves.   Winter is a hazardous time with frequent burn injuries being reported.  Mustafa Hussein, a Darb el Ahmar resident, is a founding participant of SolarCITIES.  He became  convinced of the usefulness of the technology after meeting Thomas Culhane, SolarCITIES founder, who  sketched him a prototype of a solar panel and heater.  The system was built; 25,000 dollars in funding  was obtained from the U. S.  Agency for International Development; and 35 units installed. Amm Hassain, 70 years old, was one of the first residents to agree to the installation of the unit on his  building’s rooftop.  No longer does his family have to laboriously boil water for a bath, risking potential  injury.  The unit provides 200 lt of hot water per day, which can serve up to 10 family members comfortably,  and 200 lt of rooftop coldwater storage to help them get through the many days when water is cut in  the community. Mustafa Hussein feels projects like these have more value: 'The government plans are removed from us.   Here we involve the community directly.  I live here, I know this place, I know how to connect with  people. 'But, unless more funding is received, SolarCITIES may not grow.  With the average annual income in  these areas being 610 dollars, the 678 dollar unit is unaffordable for most.  Hussein feels people will realise the importance of turning to solar energy within a few years.  'We’ll  experience more power cuts.  Last summer there was a scarcity of gas tanks and people died fighting for  them. 'Fekry wants Egypt to follow the Tunisian model: 'The government subsidised solar water heaters, and  provided them on credit with low interest rates,' he explains.  But, with an unequal playing field, a paradigm shift toward renewable energy seems unlikely.  Even with  gas subsidies in Egypt being phased out, fossil energy remains cheap, while a lack of competition won’t  reduce the cost of solar energy. Kuraymat cost 360 million dollars and the Kom Ombo plant’s cost is estimated at 270 million dollars.   The Egyptian government plans to spend 100-120 billion dollars to triple capacity by 2027. Fekry points to taxes on imported solar components as the culprit contributing to the high cost of solar  energy.  He also believes that, 'we can only expand if we have finance.  Foreign investors should direct  funds to Egypt now, and not wait until the country is stable.  ' 