Like our cave-dwelling ancestors of 200,000 years ago, nearly  three billion people still use fire for cooking and heating.   Of those, some 1. 5 billion people have no access to  electricity.  For a billion more, their only access is to  sporadic and unreliable electricity networks. Now an ambitious global effort is being  launched by the United  Nations to bring electricity to everyone on the planet by 2030. 'Energy is the issue for the next decade,' said Kandeh Yumkella,  director-general of the United Nations Industrial  Development  Organization (UNIDO). 'Achieving the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) is impossible  without energy,' Yumkella said at the opening of the 2011 Vienna  Energy Forum last week. The MDGs include reducing by half the proportion of people living in  poverty by 2015, and ensuring environmental sustainability. Some 1,200 delegates from 100 countries participated in the forum,  along with 40 government ministers, to discuss how to bring clean,  efficient, reliable and affordable energy services for the long-term  prosperity of all people. 'The 791 million people in sub-Saharan Africa use as much electricity  as the 19 million in metropolitan New York City,' Yumkella told  delegates. Indoor air pollution from burning dung, charcoal, and wood for  heating and cooking leads to nearly two million premature deaths of  women and children every year, more than all the deaths from malaria  and tuberculosis, he said.  'We're here to prepare an action plan to  be launched later this year to change all this. 'Extending electrical services to the 1. 5 billion who have no access  will cost between 30 and 40 billion dollars a year for the next 20  years, according to various estimates by the International Energy  Agency and others.  That represents just three percent of current  annual expenditures on energy.  And it is just eight percent of what  is currently spent on subsidies for fossil fuels, said Carsten Staur,  the permanent representative of Denmark to the United Nations. 'The goal of energy for all is ambitious but doable,' Staur said. That goal is one of three energy goals U. N.  Secretary-General Ban Ki- moon asked participants at the Forum to support and on which to  develop a plan of action to be launched in 2012 during the U. N.   International Year for Sustainable Energy for All. The other two goals are to reduce energy intensity by 40 percent and  to increase the share of renewable energy to 30 percent globally by  2030.  These goals bring a multitude of benefits, including cleaner  air, sustainable economic development, climate change mitigation,  better health and livelihoods and more, Ban told delegates by video- link. Energy experts calculate that decentralised, off-grid technologies  like wind, solar, geo-thermal and micro-hydro energy generation are  the fastest and more cost effective way for most who have no access.   Extending current electrical grids only makes economic sense to meet  15-25 percent of the need due to the high costs. 'Access to electricity is the key to overcoming poverty,' said Ged  Davis, co-president of the Global Energy Assessment (GEA)  Council. Davis warned that most of this electricity for the poor needs to be  green to avoid adding more carbon emissions from burning fossil fuels  like coal.  'There's plenty of fossil fuels left in the ground.  There  is no way we can burn known coal reserves without a horrendous impact  on the climate,' Davis told the forum. A rapid transition away from fossil fuel energy sources is needed to  avoid dangerous climate change, scientists agree.  Developed countries  need to reduce their carbon emissions 40 percent by 2020.  The  European Union has made cuts of nearly 20 percent so far, but  countries like the U. S. , Canada and Australia are far behind. Fortunately, the energy potential of renewable energy is far greater  than fossil fuels but they are conceptually different since  renewables are energy flows not energy units, Davis said. That is one issue the GEA will tackle in  its advice to policy makers.  The GEA is a five-year scientific  assessment involving hundreds of energy experts on how to meet the  world's energy needs. The GEA will be a policy-relevant assessment, lay out the linked  options for going forward, provide a vision of how to resolve energy  challenges simultaneously and provide new insight into the potential  leverage points for achieving more sustainable energy futures.  It is  expected to be released in 2012. Energy efficiency is the key to bringing energy services to everyone  and dealing with climate change, Davis said, noting that, 'Efficiency  opens up enormous flexibility in energy choices. 'It is also two to three times better to invest in efficiency than in  energy generation.  Buildings can use 90 percent less energy, and can  even be retrofitted to generate surplus energy, he said. However, less than 50 million dollars a year is being invested  globally in research into renewables and energy efficiency, an amount  he calls 'peanuts'. The biggest challenge of this decade is avoiding 'locking into  current technologies', he warned.  Building coal-fired power plants,  high-energy buildings and other infrastructure today locks countries  onto a wasteful energy and high-carbon emission pathway for the next  20 or 30 years. Development with a 'high-carbon lock in' poses a danger to all.   Everyone on the planet has a stake in the success of the U. N. 's  Sustainable Energy for All campaign.  However, finding the 30 to 40  billion dollars a year to make this happen won't be easy, warns  Monique Barbut, CEO and chair of the Global Environment Facility  (GEF), the world's largest funder of projects to improve the global  environment. 'It's an extremely large amount to sustain for two decades.  Getting  the funding is a big challenge,' Barbut told the forum.  The GEF, which has 182 governments as members, has invested 3. 1  billion dollars to finance low carbon projects in its 20-year  existence. 'The private sector is not going to invest in this unless they are  assured of a good return.  That's the reality,' she said. 