Political will is all that's needed to bring electricity to  the 2. 5 billion people with no or unreliable access to power,  or to feed the one billion who go hungry every day, or to  finally begin to slash carbon emissions to avoid dangerous  climate change, or just about any other global problem. Humanity has the technology, resources and even the money to solve  these problems, agree scientists, corporate business leaders, heads  of civil society organisations and United Nations agencies and  government ministers.  'All that is lacking is political will,' they  almost always declare at the dozens of international conferences,  summits and forums this reporter has attended for the past five  years.  And then everyone goes home. What is this magical 'political will' that can solve any problem?It seems it is as simple as deciding to do something and then making  sure it happens no matter what.  You decide to take a train somewhere.   You plan the time and route, book the ticket, pay for it and arrange  your life to make sure you get on that train.  Every day, we make  decisions and carry them out. 'Political will is really about priorities,' says Anders Wijkman,  former member of the European Parliament and current vice chair of  the Tällberg Foundation, a Swedish NGO. The priority for Europe and many countries is the current economic  crisis and all else is secondary right now, said Wijkman, who has  fought to put many important environmental and development issues at  the top of the agenda in Europe. Everyone in the world could have electricity or be fed properly if it  were the most important thing for world leaders to do.  However, not  only are other issues clamouring for attention, there are enormous  barriers to doing anything different such as bringing light to the  billion people who are left in the dark when the sun goes down. 'You have to remember politicians are more interested in incremental  change than transformational change,' Wijkman told IPS at the 2011  Vienna Energy Forum last week. Some 1,200 delegates from 100 countries attended along with 40  government ministers to discuss how to bring clean, efficient,  reliable and affordable energy services for the long-term prosperity  of all people.  The need for 'political will' was frequently cited. Political leadership is in fact an oxymoron.  It doesn't mean what  everyone thinks it does.  In off-the-record conversations with retired  politicians, they have candidly admitted their first priority as  ministers was to ensure their party was re-elected.  Taking a  leadership role on anything else was viewed as risky and politically  dangerous. 'It is up to the public to demand change,' they often told IPS.   Unfortunately, the public listens to what politicians say and pays  too little attention to what they do. There are also powerful barriers to changing priorities in the form  of special interest groups such as the corporate sector.  Renewable  energy was and is still strongly opposed by big power utilities, says  Wijkman. Renewable energy is generally small-scale and decentralised, and  utilities like big and centralised.  Utilities have made their  investments in big power generation facilities.  'Extending the  operational life of big power plants, be it coal or nuclear, means  huge profits at very little cost,' he says.   Even in progressive Europe, the fight to shift to renewable energy  was difficult.  Tough legislation and rich feed-in tariffs are the  main reason Europe has been able to reduce its carbon emissions  through alternative energy generation even though overall energy  demand has risen.  And because publicly subsidised coal or oil still  does not pay the full costs of their pollution - smog and carbon -  renewables are more expensive to install. 'There is an ideology in industry that renewables cannot meet their  needs and the only way is with big centralised power,' Wijkman says.   However, that is not the case when wind and sun energy is coupled  with smart grids, energy storage using water (pumping water uphill  when energy demand is low) and intelligent design. There is an unwillingness to move away from business as usual and  there is even fear amongst politicians and the public that change  will mean giving up what we are used to and that is why we are not  proactive, Wijkman concluded. The reality is that business as usual cannot be sustained from either  an environmental or development point of view, said economist Nebojsa  Nakicenovic, deputy director of the International Institute for  Applied Systems Analysis located near Vienna. 'A transformation of the global energy system is needed,' Nakicenovic  says. That transformation can bring a wide range of benefits, including  cleaner air, better health, more productive societies, a reduction in  conflicts, and getting the world on a path to keeping global warming  below two degrees C.  The triple goals set out at the Vienna Forum of  energy for all, energy intensity reduction of 40 percent and generate  30 percent of the world's electricity with renewables would bring  those benefits and is doable, he says. 'It is doable only if there is early and sustained investments,' he  warns, and only if there are no further investments in coal power  plants, and energy gobbling buildings and other infrastructure.  But  the window of opportunity is already closing.  'If we wait too long it  will be too late,' he adds. The fear is that political leaders will not heed this warning and the  necessary energy transformation will not become a top priority until  it is too late.  It seems that only if the public exerts its will can  this outcome be altered. 