As a budget battle rages on in the U. S.  Congress and President  Barack Obama's military budget comes under increasingly harsh  scrutiny, a report released here Thursday by the Institute for  Policy Studies suggests that reallocating defence spending  towards tackling climate change might be the only solution to  the administration's woes. '[The] president speaks beautifully on the need to change our  relationship with the rest of the world but the budget itself hasn't  fulfilled the promise of that rhetoric,' Miriam Pemberton, co-author  of 'The United Security Budget for the United States, FY 2012' report  and research fellow at the Institute for Policy Studies, told IPS. 'The bottom line is that the current [desire] for deficit reduction  provides a strong opening to really get serious about making military  cuts.  Moving money into non-military foreign engagement will do a lot  to underwrite and make real the administration's promises,' Pemberton  added. The report, released annually since 2004 and supported by a task  force of prominent military and civilian experts, claims that 'The  Defense Department has begun to recognize climate change as a major  security threat even as federal government funding to address the  issue has begun to be cut in FY 2012. 'Though Obama threw his weight behind climate efforts in 2009 under  the stimulus American Recovery and Reinvestment Act (ARRA), that  support has now slowed to a trickle at a time when even mainstream  observers are taking seriously the impacts of mega-floods, severe  droughts and rapidly melting icecaps. In his recent article 'Climate Denial: can science and the truth  withstand the merchants of poison?', former vice president Al Gore  blasted Obama for failing to speak out vehemently against ongoing and  impending climate catastrophes, referring to the dumping of 90  million tonnes of heat-trapping emissions into the earth's atmosphere  every 24 hours as potentially destructive to 'human civilisation' as  we know it. Citing statistics from the National Aeronautics and Space  Administration (NASA), Gore wrote that '2010 was tied with 2005 as  the hottest year measured since…the 1880s. ' As a result of such over- heating, the Arctic ice cap lost a full 40 percent of its area over  the last three decades, he added. Adding fodder to the argument that action is needed, the Global  Governance Project estimates that by the year 2050, the world will  have 200 million climate-displaced refugees on its hands, the  majority of them from low-lying coastal areas, as a result of rising  water levels. 'All of these interconnected threats, especially climate-induced  destabilisation of certain parts of the world, pose a threat to U. S.   national security — particularly in the long term,' Michael Gerrard,  director of the Center for Climate Change Law at Columbia University,  told IPS. However, says Pemberton, the U. S.  government's budget scarcely does  justice to the urgency of the situation. The overall budget dedicated to tackling climate change dropped from  33. 2 billion dollars for FY 2011 to 27. 6 billion dollars in FY 2012 —  a nearly 17 percent decline in federal support, at a time when  'substantially more support is needed', the report said. The authors went on to recommend that the federal government invest  at least 50 billion dollars a year in energy efficiency and renewable  energy, leveraged to encourage a further 100 billion dollars worth of  investments from the private sector. With total public and private expenditures of 150 billion dollars  annually — accounting for one percent of GDP and eight percent of  total private investment — the report's authors believe that the U. S.   economy has a 'reasonable chance' of attaining Obama's vision of  reducing carbon emissions in the country to 4,200 metric tonnes by  2030. 'Such a reallocation of resources from 'offensive' to 'preventative'  measures really does double duty,' Pemberton told IPS. 'It reduces our dependence on foreign oil and thus on the whims of  dictators who sit atop those oil reserves, while at the same time  paying dividends in the form of job creation in the domestic  economy,' she added. Last year, Pemberton authored the Institute for Policy Studies'  annual 'Military Vs.  Climate Security' report, which found that the  ratio of military spending to climate spending dropped from 94:1 to  41:1. 'This is progress, obviously,' Pemberton wrote.  'But a shift of one  percent of the military budget does not come close to bringing  climate security investment in line with the magnitude of the  threat. ''Climate change is…only going to get worse,' Pemberton told IPS, 'And  the military forces are going to be strained to the breaking point in  their efforts to deal with it. ''We need a budget process that looks at our security challenges as a  whole, and allocates resources in a way that matches the lip service  everyone in government pays to the co-equal importance of military  and non-military tools,' she added. Former U. S.  Defence Secretary Robert Gates himself identified  imbalances in military spending back in 2008, going so far as to  claim that 'America's civilian institutions of diplomacy and  development have been chronically undermanned and underfunded for far  too long… relative to what we spend on the military. 'But far from being scaled down, the military continues to operate on  a 700-billion-dollar annual budget, the report shows. 'There is plenty [here] that can be trimmed,' said Lawrence Korb, co- author of the report and senior fellow at the Center for American  Progress.  'The report details 77 billion dollars of the lowest  hanging fruit. 'Some of the suggested 'trade-offs' between what the report terms  'offensive' and 'preventative' expenditures include the 2. 41-billion- dollar allotment for a second Virginia Class Submarine versus meeting  the State Department's request for 2. 14 billion dollars for  Contributions to International Peacekeeping Activities account; or  continuing the 1. 3 billion dollars of annual aid to Egypt's military  at the expense of investing in the country's burgeoning post- revolution economy. 'These are the kind of trade-offs our lawmakers should be considering  - decisions about what kind of spending will really make us and the  rest of the world safer,' Pemberton argued. *With additional reporting by Lily Hough. 