Avoiding the coming catastrophic nexus of climate change,  food, water and energy shortages, along with worsening  poverty, requires a global technological overhaul involving  investments of 1. 9 trillion dollars each year for the next 40  years, said experts from the U. N.  Department of Economic and  Social Affairs (UN-DESA) in Geneva Tuesday. 'The need for a technological revolution is both a development and  existential imperative for civilisation,' said Rob Vos, lead author  of a new report, 'The Great Green Technological Transformation'. Absent in the U. N.  report is a call for the other necessary  transformation: what to do with the market-driven economic system  that has put humanity on this catastrophic collision course? Attempts  to 'green' capitalism are failing and will fail, according to many of  the more than 200 social science researchers at a groundbreaking  international conference in The Hague titled 'Nature Inc?' Jun.  30 to  Jul.  2. 'We must start tackling and questioning some core capitalist dictums,  such as consumerism, hyper-competition, the notion that 'private' is  always better, and especially economic growth,' says Bram Büscher,  the conference co-organiser and researcher at the Institute of Social  Studies (ISS) at Erasmus University in The Hague, Netherlands. Equally important is to stop looking at nature as a collection of  economic objects and services that 'must only benefit some specific  idea of human economic progress', Büscher told IPS. Governments, the World Bank, the United Nations and development  agencies, international conservation organisations and others have  all come to see markets as the only way to mobilise enough money to  end deforestation, increase the use of alternative energy, boost food  production, alleviate poverty, reduce pollution and solve a host of  other serious and longstanding problems. Started as a small gathering of academics, Nature Inc? became a major  event as hundreds of experts from around the world wished to  participate.  Büscher believes the main reason for this is that many  are actively doing research on environmental and conservation issues  and are increasingly running into new market schemes like carbon  credit trading, payments for ecosystem services, biodiversity  derivatives and new conservation finance mechanisms, and so on. 'Payments for ecosystem services are the newest tropical 'miracle'  crop,' said Kathleen McAfee of San Francisco State University. The market is putting new values on tropical forests as carbon sinks,  reservoirs of biodiversity or ecotourism destinations, McAfee said  during the conference. The World Bank, U. N.  and others say that the only way to generate  large corporate sector and private investment to protect tropical  forests is by payments for ecosystem services such as carbon and  biodiversity offset markets such as Reduced Deforestation and  Degradation for biodiversity known as REDD+.  These are also touted as  the way out of poverty for communities living in or near forests. 'However, markets are preconditioned on inequality and will only make  matters worse,' McAfee said. Markets will look for the cheapest land available, which means the  poorest will be displaced because they don't have formal land tenure  or they will be persuaded by promises of large payments.  In order to  secure the investment, carbon traders will place restrictions on the  use of the land for decades.  Technical assessments and monitoring will also be needed, which  results in high costs as was the case for a project in Costa Rica,  McAfee said.  'The poor got very little. . . it didn't even cover their  costs,' she noted. When the European Union committed to reduce its carbon emissions by  20 percent by 2020, some European multinational industries with high  carbon footprints simply moved to countries like the United States  where there were no restrictions, said Yda Schreuder of the  University of Delaware. 'Europe going it alone on carbon reductions has resulted in higher  overall emissions globally,' said Schreuder, author of 'The Corporate  Greenhouse', a critical look at the political economy of the climate  change debate. Globalisation greatly enables companies to quickly shift their  operations to where costs or restrictions are lower.  To meet its 2020  target, Europe reduced its use of coal 35 to 50 percent by switching  to renewable energy like wind, but mainly through much higher use of  natural gas obtained from Russia.  Natural gas emits much less carbon than coal.  However, over the same  time period, Russia increased its use of coal for domestic energy  because it could make more money selling natural gas to Europe,  Schreuder said. 'The World Trade Organization encourages all this to happen.  Markets  are a driving force behind increasing emissions of carbon,' she  added. Digging deeper into these schemes reveals their inherent  contradictions and unintended consequences, but they are 'often  promoted in lyrical win-win language', said Büscher. Many believe the green technology transformation that the new U. N.   report calls for is unlikely to succeed without a move away from the  economic growth-at-all-costs paradigm that dominates nearly  everyone's thinking.  There is an overwhelming need to find  alternatives and stop promoting an economic system that has created  the crisis. 'These are incredibly complex problems and there are no simple  solutions,' Büscher concluded. 