Heat waves clearly can destroy crop harvests.  The world saw  high heat decimate Russian wheat in 2010.  Crop ecologists have  found that each one-degree Celsius rise in temperature above  the optimum can reduce grain harvests by 10 percent.  But the  indirect effects of higher temperatures on our food supply are  no less serious. Rising temperatures are already melting the West Antarctic and  Greenland ice sheets.  Recent studies indicate that a combination of  melting ice sheets and glaciers, plus the thermal expansion of the  ocean as it warms could raise sea level by up to six feet during this  century. Yet even a three-foot rise in sea level would sharply reduce the rice  harvest in Asia, a region home to over half the world's people that  grows 90 percent of the world's rice.  It would inundate half the  riceland in Bangladesh and submerge part of the Mekong Delta in Viet  Nam.  Viet Nam, second only to Thailand as a rice exporter, could lose  its exportable rice surplus. This would leave the 20 or so countries that import rice from Viet  Nam looking elsewhere.  Numerous other rice-growing river deltas in  Asia would be submerged in varying degrees.  While the ice sheets are melting, so too are mountain glaciers.  The  snow and ice masses in the world's mountain ranges and the water they  store are taken for granted simply because they have been there since  before agriculture began.  Now we risk losing the 'reservoirs in the  sky' on which so many farmers and cities depend.  The World Glacier Monitoring Service reported in 2010 the 19th  consecutive year of shrinking mountain glaciers.  Glaciers are melting  in all of the world's major mountain ranges, including the Andes, the  Rockies, the Alps, the Himalayas, and the Tibetan Plateau.  In South America, some 22 percent of Peru's glacial endowment, which  feeds the many rivers that supply water to farmers and cities in the  arid coastal regions, has disappeared.  Ohio State University  glaciologist Lonnie Thompson reported in 2007 that the Quelccaya  Glacier in southern Peru, which had been retreating by 20 feet per  year in the 1960s, was retreating by 200 feet annually. Bolivia is also fast losing the glaciers whose ice melt supplies its  farmers and cities with water.  Between 1975 and 2006, the area of its  glaciers shrank by nearly half.  Bolivia's famed Chacaltaya Glacier,  once the site of the world's highest ski resort, disappeared in 2009.  For the 53 million people living in Peru, Bolivia, and Ecuador, the  loss of their mountain glaciers and dry-season river flow threatens  food security and political stability.  Not only do farmers in the  region produce much of their wheat and potatoes with the river water  from these disappearing glaciers, but well over half the region's  electricity supply comes from hydroelectric sources.  Currently, few  countries are being affected by melting mountain glaciers as much as  these Andean societies.  As Peru's glaciers shrink, the water flow from the mountains to the  country's arid coastal region, where 60 percent of the people live,  will decline during the dry season.  This region includes Lima, which,  with nearly nine million inhabitants, is the world's second largest  desert city, after Cairo.  Given the coming decline in its water  supply, a U. N.  study refers to Lima as 'a crisis waiting to happen'. In many of the world's agricultural regions, snow is the leading  source of irrigation and drinking water.  In the southwestern United  States, for instance, the Colorado River - the region's primary  source of irrigation water - depends on snowfields in the Rockies for  much of its flow. California, in addition to depending heavily on the Colorado, relies  on snowmelt from the Sierra Nevada mountain range to supply  irrigation water to the Central Valley, the country's fruit and  vegetable basket.  A preliminary analysis of rising temperature effects on three major  river systems in the western United States - the Columbia, the  Sacramento, and the Colorado - indicates that the winter snow pack in  the mountains feeding them will be reduced dramatically and that  winter rainfall and flooding will increase. With a business-as-usual energy policy, global climate models project  a 70-percent reduction in the snow pack for the western United States  by mid-century.  A detailed study of the Yakima River Valley, a vast  fruit-growing region in Washington State, shows progressively heavier  harvest losses as the snow pack shrinks, reducing irrigation water  flows.  Agriculture in the Central Asian countries of Afghanistan,  Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan, and Uzbekistan  depends heavily on snowmelt from the Hindu Kush, Pamir, and Tien Shan  Mountain ranges for irrigation water.  And nearby Iran gets much of  its water from the snowmelt in the 5,700-meter-high Alborz Mountains  between Tehran and the Caspian Sea.  Ice melting in the Himalayas and on the Tibetan Plateau poses an even  graver threat to food security at a global scale.  It is the ice melt  from these mountain glaciers that helps sustain the major rivers of  Asia during the dry season, when irrigation needs are greatest. In the Indus, Ganges, Yellow, and Yangtze River basins, where  irrigated agriculture depends heavily on the rivers, the loss of any  dry-season flow is bad news for farmers.  China is the world's leading  producer of wheat.  India is number two.  (The United States is number  three. ) With rice, China and India totally dominate the world  harvest.  Therefore, the melting of these glaciers coupled with the  depletion of aquifers present the most massive threat to food  security the world has ever faced.    In India, the giant Gangotri Glacier, which helps keep the Ganges  River flowing during the dry season, is retreating.  The Ganges River  is by far the largest source of surface water irrigation in India and  a source of water for the 407 million people living in the Gangetic  basin.  Yao Tandong, a leading Chinese glaciologist, reports that glaciers on  the Tibetan Plateau in western China are now melting at an  accelerating rate.  Many smaller glaciers have already disappeared.   Yao believes that two-thirds of these glaciers could be gone by 2060. If this melting of glaciers continues, Yao says it 'will eventually  lead to an ecological catastrophe'.  The Yangtze, by far the country's  largest river, helps to produce half or more of its 130-million-ton  rice harvest.  Like the depletion of aquifers, the melting of glaciers can  artificially inflate food production for a short period.  At some  point, however, as the glaciers shrink and the smaller ones disappear  entirely, so does the water available for irrigation.  The melting of the glaciers on the Tibetan Plateau would appear to be  China's problem.  It is.  But it is also everyone else's problem.  In a  world where grain prices have recently climbed to record highs, any  disruption of the wheat or rice harvests due to water shortages in  India or China will raise their grain imports, driving up food prices  for all.  In India, where just over 40 percent of all children under five years  of age are underweight and undernourished, hunger will intensify and  child mortality will likely climb. For China, a country already struggling to contain food price  inflation, there may well be spreading social unrest if food supplies  tighten.  For U. S.  consumers, this melting poses a nightmare scenario.   If China enters the world market for massive quantities of grain, as  it has already done for soybeans over the last decade, it will  necessarily come to the United States - far and away the leading  grain exporter.  Ironically, the two countries that are planning to build most of the  new coal-fired power plants, China and India, are precisely the ones  whose food security is most massively threatened by the carbon  emitted from burning coal.  It is now in their interest to try and  save their mountain glaciers by quickly shifting energy investment  from coal-fired power plants into energy efficiency, wind farms, and  solar thermal and geothermal power plants.  *Adapted from 'World on the Edge' by Lester R.  Brown, founder and  president of the Earth Policy Institute.  Full book available at  www. earth-policy. org/books/wote. 