Educators in Indonesia are turning green with environmental advocacies they  plan to integrate into the curriculum of state-run elementary and high schools  through the 'Green Teacher Network'. But there’s an urgent push for one particular advocacy—protecting mangroves that mitigate climate  change—given the fast depletion of these coastal forests.  The idea for expanding the 'Green Teacher Network' came about after 30 teachers from 21 elementary,  junior and senior high schools in Greater Jakarta, Southeast Sulawesi, North Maluku, and Banten  provinces attended a mangrove workshop organised by the Sampoerna School of Education in Jakarta in  June.  'We learned how to integrate environmental issues, particularly mangroves, into school subjects to make  our students aware of the importance of mangrove reserves in dealing with abrasion and rising sea  level,' said Ekowanto (who uses just one name), a teacher at the state-owned Senior High Vocational  School I in Pandeglang in Banten. There is reason to be concerned about Indonesia’s mangroves.  These forests alone account for one- third of the world’s mangrove reserves, but their size has shrunk dramatically in the last two decades  from around eight million hectares to some 4. 5 million now, according to Andreas Pramudianto,  lecturer at the University of Indonesia Postgraduate Programme’s Human Resources and Environmental  Research Centre.  Hazardous home and industrial wastes, seawater contamination, and massive conversion of mangrove  forests into residential and fishpond areas are some of the reasons behind the sharp fall.  'The rate of mangrove destruction is likely to accelerate.  We have to design educational programmes,  trainings, or workshops aimed at raising people’s knowledge, understanding, and awareness on the  importance of mangroves,' Pramudianto told the teachers. In Wakatobi in the province of Southeast Sulawesi in southern Indonesia, teachers have been integrating  lessons on the environment into school activities since 2005.  Maaruji (single name), coordinator of the  Green Teacher Network in Wakatobi, said schools in his regency have taught marine life — including  mangroves — to students from playgroup level up to senior high school for the past six years.  'This is due to the fact that Wakatobi has more water territory than land territory,' he said during the  workshop, called 'Mangroves 4 Life'. Lessons on mangroves are hard to find in the country’s national curriculum.  Teachers who attended the  workshop pointed out that pollution, endangered animals, deforestation, the 3Rs (reduce, reuse and  recycle) and global warming are the common environmental issues discussed in classrooms. 'The teaching of mangroves is rare because many teachers themselves do not know about mangroves  and their uses,' said Dewi Muthia, an elementary teacher at Islamic School Al Fauzien in Depok, West  Java.  Siti Hawa A.  Rachman, an Indonesian language teacher at the public Junior High School 2 in Ternate,  North Maluku, said she learned how to incorporate mangrove issues into her class.  'I now know that I  can raise my students’ awareness about the country’s mangrove forests by choosing story books  related to mangroves,' Rachman said. 'I’m planning to share my knowledge about mangroves with fellow teachers in Ternate and if possible  encourage other schools to join hands (in planting and protecting mangroves),' said Rachman, adding  that all seven regencies in North Maluku province in northeastern Indonesia have coastal areas with  huge mangrove forest reserves. Stien Matakupan, a lecturer at Sampoerna School of Education, said the training was the second of three  mangrove workshops her school has planned for 2011. 'We are organising another mangrove workshop for teachers in August with participants expected to  come from Indonesia and some neighbouring countries,' said Matakupan.  The first one, she added, was  held in May in Probolinggo, East Java. 'The workshops aim to encourage schools to integrate environmental issues, including mangroves, into  their programmes, and increase their students’ awareness by making field trips to local mangrove  sites,' Matakupan said, explaining the reason behind her school’s decision to organise mangrove  trainings for teachers. 'Many of the country’s schools are located near mangrove forests,' she pointed out.  During the workshop, teachers learned that mangrove trees could be used to make fruit juice, syrup  and jam besides providing breeding, nursery and resting areas for marine life and other species such as  migratory birds. A joint research by scientists from the Centre for International Forestry Research in Bogor, West Java,  and the U. S.  Department of Agriculture Forest Service revealed that mangroves in the Indian and Pacific  Oceans store more carbon than previously recognised, underscoring calls for mangrove protection in  order to play a key role in mitigating climate change.  According to the research published in the monthly multi-disciplinary journal Nature Geoscience in  April, much of that carbon is stored in the ground below the mangrove forests, which account for  merely 0. 7 percent of tropical forest area.  The study also suggested that the destruction and  degradation of mangrove reserves could produce 10 percent of the world’s total deforestation  emissions. Ekowanto vowed to teach some 1,200 students in his school how to grow mangroves.  'I have collected  mangrove seeds and this coming academic year, my colleagues and I will teach our students to  germinate the seeds in the school compound and plant them later in destroyed mangrove sites in  Labuan district, Pandeglang regency,' he said.  The new school year starts in mid-July. Ekowanto, who is also chairman of the Banten’s Indonesian Teachers Association (IGI), said he would  establish a 'Green Teacher Network' in the province in order to increase teachers’ environmental  awareness and competence. Matakupan said an online forum would be launched during the August seminar to allow teachers to  share their knowledge and publish environment-related activities in their respective schools. 'The forum will not only allow participants to get in touch with their colleagues in other parts of  Indonesia but also link them up with their counterparts in different countries such as Malaysia, Japan,  Singapore, and even Sweden,' Matakupan said.   