As the world's largest international agricultural research  coalition celebrated its 40th anniversary here this week, it  also announced the launch of a programme to help provide  enough maize to meet the annual food demands of over 600  million consumers by 2030. The Consultative Group on International Agricultural Research (CGIAR)  said the new initiative will inject 170 million dollars into research  for developing drought-resistant maize varieties and improving and  disseminating already-developed strains that possess resistance to  major diseases in Sub-Saharan Africa and Asia. 'This is a highly ambitious project to address world hunger,' said  Thomas Lumpkin, director general of the International Maize and Wheat  Improvement Center (CIMMYT). 'It will take an enormous amount of work and cooperation between  public and private sector institutions to meet the goals,' he added. The world's agricultural system is indeed facing difficult  challenges.  As the global population continues to increase - hitting  an expected seven billion this year, according to the U. N.  - adequate  distribution of the world's food supply has lagged, and prices are  volatile. Meanwhile, vital research and development programmes have been  slashed, especially in poor countries where hunger pains are the  sharpest and most pervasive. In June 2009, U. S.  President Barack Obama pledged 3. 5 billion dollars  as part of a 22-billion-dollar commitment by the Group of Eight (G8)  to a new global hunger and food security initiative for some 22  billion dollars announced at their summit in L'Aquila, Italy. But the tug of war between Congress and the administration regarding  the depleted U. S.  Treasury has so far made it impossible for Obama to  honour his pledge, and his administration's proposals to boost aid  for agricultural research and developments have experienced the most  drastic cuts. As the world recovers from a global financial crisis, only a quarter  of the commitments made at L'Aquila have been met today, Dr.  Shenngen  Fan, director general of the International Food Policy Research  Institute, told IPS. 'Before the international community issues any new recommendations,  they first need to make good on previous commitments,' he said. Nearly a half-century after the Green Revolution - the first  organised large-scale venture to develop new strains for staple crops  grown in the Global South - investments in agricultural research and  development are barely beginning to recover from lows reached in the  early 2000s. Before the Green Revolution caught on in the late 1960s, one in every  three people living in the developing world was undernourished.  As  the peak years of the Green Revolution drew to a close in the 1990s,  that ratio had fallen to one in five.  The total number of  undernourished also dropped below 800 million for the first time in  modern history. Nevertheless, the initial outpouring of financial support for the  Green Revolution - which helped the food supply outpace the growth in  the world's population between 1970 and 1990 - progressively weakened  in the years that followed, as wealthy countries shifted their  priorities and aid away from agriculture. The imbalance between supply and demand over much of the past decade  has resulted in huge price jumps that, though tolerable in the West,  have created a 'toxic brew of real pain contributing to social  unrest' around the world, noted Robert Zoellick, president of the  World Bank, last month.  The World Bank is one of the founders of the  CGIAR and acts as trustee of the CGIAR Fund. Anti-riot police turned to tear gas and dogs Thursday to disperse  crowds of angry Kenyans protesting the increasingly unaffordable  prices for maize flour - a staple source of food for the country's 40  million people.  They are among the estimated 12 million people in the  Horn of Africa to have been hit by this year's drought, which is the  worst in 60 years. 'The aid effort faces enormous hurdles.  There is not enough money to  buy food in the quantities required, and the price of maize has risen  by up to 40 percent since a year ago in [Africa],' according to Jane  Cocking, Oxfam's humanitarian director. Still fighting to reverse the cutbacks, CGIAR — which unites donors  with a consortium of some 15 global research centres worldwide — is  tasked with improving crop yields in poor countries. CGIAR-funded research projects range from 59 million to 600 million  dollars. With the soaring price of maize on the wholesale market in Kenya  exceeding the peaks reached during the 2007-2008 food crisis, CGIAR  supporters say the timing seems ripe for the 170-million-dollar boost  in funding for enhanced maize research announced by CGIAR Wednesday. 'This programme aims to double the productivity of maize farms, while  also making those farms more resilient to climate change and reducing  the amount of land used for growing the crop,' said Carlos Perez del  Castillo, who chairs the CGIAR Consortium. Ranking third after rice and wheat as a source of calories in the  diets of developing country populations, maize is the preferred  staple food source for nearly one billion people - mostly in Africa  and South America - including one-third of the world's malnourished  children.  It is also cheaper than either of the two most popular  grains, rice and wheat. Recent studies carried out by CIMMYT, which is based in El Batan,  Mexico, estimate that demand for maize in the developing world is  likely to double by 2050. The programme will be implemented by CIMMYT and the Nigeria-based  International Institute of Tropical Agriculture (IITA), together with  a global alliance of over 350 public and private partners worldwide,  including agricultural research institutes, universities, non- governmental organisations and farmer associations, and 11 national  governments that will host offices dedicated to the programme. Inger Anderson, vice president of sustainable development at the  World Bank, said the programme's first target group will be small- holder farmers who live in environments prone to drought and erratic  weather conditions and have poor access to markets. 'Small-holder farmers are among the most vulnerable people in  developing countries. ' she said.  'They should be among the first we  seek to help. ''Lacking access to decent tools, quality seeds, credit, and  agricultural extension, and being highly susceptible to the vagaries  of weather, [small-holder farmers] work hard but reap little,' Fan  said.  'When [they] have equal access to agricultural services,  inputs, and technologies, including high-yielding seeds, affordable  fertiliser, and irrigation, they have often proven to be at least as  efficient as larger farms. ''When it comes to achieving food security and reducing poverty, poor  farmers in developing countries might be part of the challenge,' Fan  added.  'But they are definitely indispensable to the solution. '