Miles away from the briny business of tuna harvesting,  delegates from around the world gathered in San Diego,  California for three days in mid-July to discuss the future of  the fishing industry. The meeting is part of an ongoing dialogue launched four years ago in  Kobe, Japan to improve the monitoring of the far-flung tuna fleets  trolling international waters.  The prized fish are sold in markets  worldwide. Although Kobe decisions are non-binding, they will play a role in  future negotiations used to govern 90 percent of the global tuna  fishery. Poaching on the part of so-called IUUs - illegal, underreported,  unlicensed - vessels is of great concern to fishery managers due to  the unrelenting pressure placed on fish species and to fishing  communities economically impacted by overfishing. According to officials from the U. S.  National Oceanic and Atmospheric  Administration (NOAA), tuna poaching is an estimated nine-billion- dollar a year enterprise, undermining any efforts to manage tuna  fisheries effectively.   Getting an accurate count is tricky because ocean-going fish such as  bluefin tuna, billfish and sharks may spawn in Fiji, mature in Hawaii  and swim to California chasing prey fish on the prevailing ocean  currents, only to reappear in nets of fisherman off Ecuador. Collecting such data is key to fisheries managers tasked with setting  the quota for the number of fish that can be caught each year.  'We are trying to sustainably manage these species and in order to do  that we must accurately gather data, analyse that information and  make informed decisions based on the evidence on what the science  tells us,' Russell Smith, a spokesperson for the NOAA, told IPS. Among the ideas suggested is greater transparency.  The U. S.   delegation is calling for the creation of a global registry of  fishing boats and IUUs akin to the VIN numbers currently used to  track and register the sale of vehicles from state to state, and  sharing that global registry among agencies tasked with regulating  tuna fisheries. In theory, the scheme should make it easier to identify and isolate  vessels operating outside the law, giving port and fishery officials  greater leverage against poachers intent on catching fish illegally.   Until now, IUUs vessels could fly flags of convenience, change their  names, swap crews and continue to operate despite numerous violations  for overfishing.  Dr.  Rebecca Lent, the NOAA director of international affairs,  believes better tracking techniques would deter these ocean-going  scofflaws.  'We have to take a global approach to tracking fishing  boats, fishing activities and to the product itself,' she told IPS. Historically, the west coast city of San Diego was the epicentre of  the U. S.  Pacific tuna fleet, until environmental concerns over too  many boats chasing too few fish caused the industry to recede during  the 1980s.  The city is still home to the corporate headquarters of  Chicken of the Sea and Bumble Bee tuna companies.  Commercial  fishermen based in San Diego still ply their trade in the waters off  Alaska and the South Pacific.  Although the overall health of the Pacific's tuna fishery seems to be  vibrant, the prognosis for tuna globally is grim.  According to a  recent report by the IUCN (the International Union for Conservation  of Nature), five of the eight species of tuna are threatened with  extinction.  Most at risk are Atlantic bluefin and the Southern  bluefin in tuna fisheries near Australia.    The decline is widely attributed to overfishing.  Up to 90 percent of  the large open-water fish have been removed from the ocean over the  last 50 years by industrial fishing, and scientists warn those losses  could lead to irreversible harm to ocean ecosystems if swift action  is not taken. Days prior to the conference, the article, 'Double Jeopardy for High  Value Tuna and Billfish', was published in the peer-reviewed journal  Science.  The study revealed that seven of the 61 species surveyed,  including tuna, billfish and mackerel, were under threat of  extinction.  According to published accounts, there has been too  little concern over the exploitation of tuna, due to the high value  of the fish stocks, exacerbated by the lack of oversight in  regulating the multinational tuna fleet.  'The true value of Kobe will be on following through,' said Gerry  Leape, the chief delegate from the Pew Trust, a Washington-based  nonprofit organisation favouring science-backed policy decisions. Cross-listing boats to prevent countries from providing safe harbor  to IUU vessels would be a step in the right direction, he told IPS. 