The government of Burkina Faso has responded to long-standing demands of  farmers for greater support for small family producers with the launch of  'Operation 100,000 Ploughs'.  Smallholder farmers say this will strengthen the  country's food security. 'The operation is welcomed by the Confédération Paysanne du Faso,' said Bassiako Dao, who is  president of the country's largest smallholder farmer organisation.  'Because today, the difficulty facing  our agriculture sector is that it is not mechanised.  Mechanisation would allow us to quickly reduce the  labour time needed. 'Instead of having five people working year-round on two hectares, with an animal-drawn plough, just  one person can work two hectares in four days, covering half a hectare per day.  The four others are  freed up to do something else,' Dao told IPS. The operation, launched in June, will make 20,000 ploughs available to the poorest rural households in  each of the next five years, half of them to be given to women.  According to Dao, the ploughs will be  made affordable thanks to an 80 percent subsidy from the government. Access to such equipment varies widely across Burkina Faso.  The agriculture ministry says that half of  the farmers in the cotton-producing regions of the country have access to some level of mechanisation,  but in other zones this falls to just one or two percent. Agriculture vitalThe agriculture sector generates 40 percent of the gross domestic product of Burkina Faso and the  authorities hope that with funding for agricultural mechanisation over the next four years, it can raise  the proportion of farmers who are mechanised country-wide from the present 20 percent to 75 percent  in 2015. According to the Ministry of Agriculture and Water, draught power is the most widespread form of  mechanisation in Burkina, where 30 percent of households own at least one draught animal; 30 percent  of these households also possess a tool for tillage and 20 percent have a cart. Alfred Sawadogo, head of the non-governmental organisation SOS Sahel, also welcomed the  announcement of the programme which, he says, responds to the demands from smallholder farmer  organisations for the improvement of family-based production. 'The government must support family farms and help them to modernise and improve their  productivity.  In the west of the country, the availaibility of land allows family operations to expand to up  to 50 hectares from a base of five or seven hectares,' Sawadogo told IPS. Farmers also say that tilling with a plough allows the soil to better absorb water, preserving moisture far  longer than a field tilled with a traditional hoe, known in Burkina Faso as a daba.  Sawadogo also  explains that animals provide a natural fertiliser in the form of manure. 'This is why the programme is attractive, because it will allow small agriculture to develop itself,' says  Dao. Women, who constitute an important part of the agricultural labour force will receive half of the  ploughs.  'They will till more than the usual quarter of a hectare - they'll be able to cultivate as much as  four hectares,' says Dao.  'The sight of women bent over, working in a field, babies on their backs; that  will be finished, thanks to this initiative. ''We have been waiting for this operation to boost our farming for a long time, because with the daba,  we couldn't do much better.  More than 70 percent of producers use hoes,' says Nimbnoma Sawadogo,  president of the Regional Agriculture Chambers of Burkina Faso. Food securityAt the G20 summit held last June, the president of the International Fund for Agricultural Development  (IFAD), Kanayo Nwanze, warned that to neglect small producers risks aggravating food insecurity and  instability of the prices of staple foods. According to IFAD, the current increase in food prices had pushed 44 million people into poverty  worldwide, creating a new and explosive situation. Since the demonstrations against the high cost of living in the country in 2008, the government has  provided around 15. 7 million dollars of support to farmers in the form of agricultural inputs. The investment is in line with the idea that agriculture is a particularly sound investment: according to  numerous studies, GDP growth arising from agriculture is twice as effective in reducing poverty than  growth in other sectors. 'We have to encouarge this initiative which will benefit families.  On the other hand, we are opposed to  those who have plenty of money, and buy 150 hectares and a Caterpillar and then strip the land of trees  and plant cotton or maize,' says SOS Sahel's Sawadogo, who is critical of authorities' encouragement of  agri-business operators in recent years. 'It's a bad form of agriculture which will destroy our environment and our soils which cannot support  work with tractors for a long time.  If there is not adquate support so that there is organic fertiliser with  livestock to enrich the soils, the tractors will turn our soil into sand,' warned Sawadogo. 