Survey your surroundings and you'll discover that coal ash -  waste from coal burned to produce electricity - is more  present in everyday life than you might expect.  To name a few  places: toothpaste, cosmetics, wallboard, cement, and  agricultural and winter de-icing products. Coal ash, also known as coal combustion residues (CCRs), and its  beneficial uses - recycling it in commercial, consumer, or  agricultural products- have lately been an area of controversy  between those who seek greater regulation of coal ash reuse and those  who unwaveringly promote it as economically and environmentally  beneficial.  The U. S.  Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) promotes the  beneficial use of coal ash, but reports indicate that the agency is  not fully aware of the potential hazards. A report filed in March by EPA's Office of the Inspector General  stated simply, 'EPA did not follow accepted and standard practices in  determining the safety of the 15 categories of CCR beneficial uses it  promoted. ' The Coal Combustion Products Partnership (C2P2) is an official  partnership between the EPA, coal industry groups and other  organisations working to promote and increase the beneficial uses of  coal ash.  The EPA suspended C2P2 in mid-2010 during a period of re- evaluation. Washington-based group Public Employees for Environmental  Responsibility (PEER) has been especially critical of EPA for the  past several years, citing the agency's willingness to promote the  beneficial uses of coal ash without full knowledge of the risks.  This week, it issued a statement declaring that EPA 'prevents its  scientists from examining health risks of coal combustion wastes  being added to consumer, agricultural and commercial products even  though the agency promotes these practices as safe. 'Kirsten Stade, PEER's advocacy director, told IPS a major concern was  that these beneficial uses were 'virtually unanalysed, unregulated in  any way'. The EPA has said it 'will develop a process to evaluate the risks of  CCR beneficial uses' even as it supports and promotes recycling CCRs  because it offsets the adverse environmental impacts caused by  burning coal and benefits human health, when managed properly.  Coal ash is rich in commercially valuable elements including  aluminium, calcium and iron, but it also can also contain low  concentrations of lead, arsenic, and mercury, among other metals that  would make a lack of data about the effects of using such materials  in consumer products reasonably alarming. What is coal ash?EPA records from 2008 indicate that 136 million tonnes of coal ash  are produced per year.  Nearly half of that is recycled in beneficial  uses, while the remaining half is disposed of in surface impoundments  and landfills. Recycled coal ash falls into two forms, encapsulated and  unencapsulated.  In the first, coal ash is bound into products such as  wallboard or concrete.  In the second, coal ash is loose, such as in  sludge form.  EPA said that it has not identified any environmental harm associated  with the beneficial uses of coal ash.  At the same time, it  acknowledged that it had 'identified concerns' in some land-based  uses for unencapsulated CCRs if proper practices were not followed,  though it did not specify whether those concerns were environmental  or health-related. When coal ash is not recycled, however, contaminants in it can leak  into drinking water and pose serious public health hazards.  Last  year, the EPA put forth two proposals to regulate coal ash disposal  in order to address the risks inherent in the process, though it does  not propose to regulate the beneficial uses of coal ash. Uses for coal ash, including in cement and concrete, structural  filler, snow and ice control and wallboard, are considered  environmentally and economically beneficial, since those CCRs are  inexpensive materials for commercial use, nor do they end up in  landfills. In 2008, an impoundment of coal ash in Kingston, Tennessee broke  open, causing damage to the environment that resulted in hundreds of  millions of dollars in cleanup.  Conflicting prioritiesStade suggested that EPA was more concerned about coal ash reuse than  about awareness of the potentially adverse effects of that recycling.  She noted that two EPA toxicologists expressed concerns to the agency  about the way it promoted beneficial uses in the absence of  definitive information regarding the safety of coal ash recycling,  asking for further research into the topic, but 'their concerns were  ignored'. Thomas Adams, executive director of the group Advancing the Use and  Management of Coal Combustion Products (ACAA), a member of C2P2  before its suspension, dismissed PEER's claims as 'nothing new' and  'just a rehash of some allegations they've been making for quite some  time. ' 'They just want to slow down any kind of effort to beneficially use  these products,' he told IPS, He targeted EPA for its dubious support of the beneficial uses of  CCRs, saying that it supported recycling coal ash in some places yet  in others was 'doing nothing to help the recycling of these materials  continue'. Stade levelled a final allegation at EPA, hinting at why the EPA did  not want to pursue regulation of coal ash and the costs for the coal  industry that regulation would entail.  The EPA scientists whose  concerns went ignored 'expressed that people that they worked with in  the agency were very chummy with these industry folks,' she told IPS. 