Despite new government regulations, China, for decades the dumping ground  for the world’s electronic waste, still struggles to treat and process millions of  tonnes of e-waste, prompting health and environmental concerns. China, where sales of electronic devices are surging, generates as much as 2. 3 million tonnes of  electronic waste domestically each year, according to a report last year by the United Nations  Environmental Programme (UNEP).  That’s second only to the United States, which produces three million  tonnes annually.  Much of that waste ends up in China, where imports of e-waste are banned but largely  tolerated.  Despite improvements to treatment facilities in recent years, China still lacks large numbers of high- tech recycling facilities and relies instead on environmentally damaging methods of disposal.  Some e- waste is burned and large amounts of hazardous material are abandoned without treatment, according  to a report by China Environment News.  'China still hasn’t established a proper e-waste management and recycling system,' Peng Ping’an, a  researcher at the Chinese Academy of Social Sciences’ Guangzhou Institute of Geochemistry tells IPS.   'Large quantities of e-waste are buried directly or dismantled by small, unlicensed plants with bare  hands. ' The waste keeps piling up.  Roughly 3. 5 million tons of electronic waste is expected to be produced in  2011, according to a report by China Construction News, under the Ministry of Housing and Urban- Rural Development.  The UN report said that by 2020, e-waste from old computers is expected jump by 400 percent from  2007 levels in China, while discarded mobile phones will be seven times higher. The government has begun to tackle the issue.  On Jan.  1, 2011, the State Council issued new  regulations to deal with the recovery and disposal of electronic waste.  Under the new regulations the  government agreed to establish a treatment fund for e-waste, which will be used to grant subsidies for  the recovery and disposal of electronic products.  But legislation covering the treatment, disposal and recycling of e-waste is still in its infancy, and the  current laws remain inadequate, Peng tells IPS.  As a result, e-waste treatment remains profit-driven,  scattered and disorganised.  There are about 100 companies and institutes engaged in e-waste recovery and disposal in China.  They  suffer from a lack of policy support and inefficient treatment facilities, Peng says.  Last year’s UN report called on developing countries to improve recycling facilities.  Boosting developing  countries’ e-waste recycling programmes can have the added benefit of creating jobs, cutting  greenhouse gas emissions and recovering a wide range of valuable metals, including silver, gold,  palladium, copper and indium, the report said.  There have been some successes.  In Tianjin, a coastal city near Beijing, the municipal environmental  bureau estimated that around four million television sets, refrigerators, computers, washing machines  and air conditioners were scrapped in 2010, making up 38,000 tons of electronic waste, according to  People’s Daily.  About 90 percent of that waste reached private businesses for recycling.  And there is room for much  more.  Green Angel, a recycling centre under the auspices of the Tianjin government recycled 70,000  household appliances last year, well short of its treatment capacity of 200,000 units a year.  Improper handling of e-waste can impact human health and the environment.  Heavy metals, including  lead, tin and barium, can contaminate underground and surface water, and electrical wires are  sometimes burnt in open air in order to get to the copper inside, spreading carcinogens into the air.   Foreign countries began dumping e-waste on China in the 1990s, creating both opportunities and  problems.  While profits were to be made from handling e-waste, China lacked regulations and  adequate treatment facilities.  Toxic substances were discharged directly into the soil and water without  proper treatment.  One town, Guiyu, in southern China’s Guangdong province, is home to the world’s highest recorded  levels of dioxin — environmental pollutants that threaten human health — which are released into the air  by burning plastics and circuit boards to extract metals, according to a 2007 report by the China  Academy of Sciences. The government has tried to bolster the e-waste recycling industry by offering incentives to people to  trade in old appliances for new ones.  People can sell old products to home appliance stores such as  Gome and Dazhong, which go on to sell them to treatment centres at a discount.  Some people take advantage of this system, however, buying cheap appliances from unlicensed plants  that have already 'treated' them by removing important components such as copper, glass and gold.   Once these appliances reach legitimate treatment centres, they are worthless.  'In meetings we’ve had with our competitors, we’ve found they all have the same problem,' Lou Yi, who  operates Taiding (Tianjin) Environmentally Friendly Science and Technology Corp. , an e-waste recycling  company, tells IPS.  Still, the trade-in scheme is essential to the survival of companies like Lou’s.  'We will go bankrupt if the  central government abolishes the policy. ' 