International donors have given more than one billion dollars  to ease the famine in Somalia and elsewhere in the Horn of  Africa, but U. N.  officials say another billion will be needed  to prevent the situation from deteriorating in other areas. 'The crisis in the East of Africa could be spiraling into a larger  catastrophe,' Francis Kennedy, a spokesperson for the U. N.  World Food  Programme (WFP), told IPS. Tens of thousands are believed to have died already. The disaster is a product of high food prices, conflict and prolonged  drought.  It is currently affecting nearly 12 million people in six  countries - Djibouti, Ethiopia, Kenya, Somalia, Sudan and Uganda. On Monday, the U. N.  announced that it will begin airlifting food to  the Somali capital of Mogadishu, where the weak government is still  in control thanks to help from African Union peacekeeping forces. Valerie Amos, the U. N.  Emergency Relief Coordinator, said over the  weekend, 'I am extremely concerned that if humanitarian agencies  cannot intervene now, famine conditions will spread to the whole of  southern Somalia within two months. 'The World Bank has announced a pledge of 500 million dollars in aid.   Most of the money will go to long-term projects to help farmers,  while 12 million dollars will be for immediate aid to those hit by  the drought. Refugee influxes from Somalia into Kenya and Ethiopia continue, with  approximately 3,500 people arriving each day, the U. N.  reported  Monday.  Over two million children in refugee camps require immediate life- saving treatment. Last week, the U. N.  declared a state of famine in the southern Bakool  and Lower Shabelle regions of southern Somalia, which are controlled  by insurgent groups that have hindered humanitarian aid. WFP is considering food drops to parts of Somalia, although it is  uncertain how much of the aid will get to the people and how much  will end up in the hands of the terrorist group Al Shabaab, pirates  or other gunmen. This was a major problem when aid agencies were trying to tackle the  drought of 1992-93 in the country. 'The vast majority of people in insurgent-controlled areas of Somalia  may starve to death unless aid reaches them in the next few weeks,'  the deputy prime minister of Somalia, Mohammed Ibrahim, said at an  emergency summit in Rome this week. Another pledging conference is scheduled in two days time in Nairobi. Kennedy told IPS that the WFP is among the aid agencies to be banned  from areas of southern Somalia by Al Shabaab. 'We have not been in these regions since early 2010 when Al Shabaab  began making their threats,' she explained.  'It is vital to get to  these areas because they are the center of the crisis.  Dialogue has  been opened to hopefully secure a presence in the region. ''In the meantime we are working on the borders of the insurgent- controlled regions, providing tents and foods and generally operating  in the windows of spaces that we can.  Although this may be risky, it  is important that we are at the very least near the area. 'Also banned are the agencies Care, the United Nations Development  Programme, and the International Medical Corps. UNICEF, however, has been allowed to continue working in these areas. Shantha Blomen, a spokesperson for the U. N.  children's agency, told  IPS, 'No, we are not banned.  We have been in the region since 1971.   However, it hasn't been easy but we got enough supplies into the  areas this month.  ''Nevertheless, we managed to supply food to over 66,000 malnourished  children.  We now plan to scale this up to 240,000 over the next  month,' she said. Asked how much damage has been done due to the world's slow response  - USAID's Famine Relief Warning System Network saw the crisis coming  last year, for example - Kennedy of WFP told IPS, 'We gave warning  back in April that factors were falling into place and some did  respond but not enough. ''Many governments and NGOs [non-governmental organisations] have now  come forward but this needs to not only continue but increase if the  crisis is to be tackled effectively,' she said. Even if the normal October rains arrive in the Horn of Africa, this  will not mean the factors that caused the crisis should be forgotten  or that the food crisis will pass, experts stress. Much of the livestock in Somalia has long since died, devastating  traditional livelihoods in the region.  And when animals die, they  note, people die.  