When news of the disastrous BP oil well explosion reached the  residents of Jean Lafitte, Louisiana last April, Mayor Tim  Kerner did the only thing he could think of to stop the oil  from destroying his community.  He encouraged everyone in his  town to join him on the water, working day and night  throughout the disaster to clean-up the spill. Now, one year after BP managed to cap the runaway well that fouled  the Gulf of Mexico with an estimated five million barrels of oil,  most of those people are ill. 'I'm afraid my neighbors will come to me and say, I wouldn't have  listened to you and kept my job if I knew it would kill me,' Kerner  said. Kerner's story was one of many shared by Kerry Kennedy, president of  the Robert F.  Kennedy Center for Justice and Human Rights, at a  briefing Wednesday evening, the day after she led a delegation to the  Gulf Coast to assess the scope of the emerging healthcare crisis in  the wake of the BP drilling disaster. 'The residents are sick,' Kennedy told IPS.  'They don't know what the  exact cause of their illness is, but because they never suffered this  way before the spill and they were all out on their fishing boats  throughout the clean-up, they suspect this has something to do with  the toxins. 'According to Anne Rolfes, founding director of the Louisiana Bucket  Brigade - an environmental justice group that partnered with Tulane  University's Disaster Resilience Leadership Academy to conduct an on- the-ground survey of residents living in impacted communities -  nearly 75 percent of those who believe they were exposed to crude oil  or dispersant reported experiencing symptoms consistent with chemical  exposure. 'Coughing, respiratory irritation, and eye irritation were the most  common,' Rolfes told IPS.  '[Respondents] described that the symptoms  came on suddenly and they left suddenly and that would be consistent  with getting some sort of wave of chemical exposure, even when we  took things like allergies into account. 'But Kennedy told IPS that local physicians are hesitant to link their  patients' symptoms to the oil.  'They don't have the expertise to make a diagnosis in toxicology,  they don't know how to treat that diagnosis, and if they do attempt  to treat it, they risk losing their medical licenses,' she said. And in a predominately rural region where a majority of patients are  self-employed and uninsured, the health care facilities are too far  away and access to toxicology experts is near impossible,' Kennedy  added.  'Even where that expertise is available, few can afford the expensive  tests and medicines needed to treat toxic poisoning,' she continued. At the briefing, Kennedy's colleagues expressed hope that Congress  would preserve funding for an expanding network of healthcare  'centres of excellence', including a low-cost model site soon to be  established in honour of Robert Kennedy in Jean Lafitte.  'They don't have the medical staff able to understand the effects of  these toxins. . . so [patient's complaints] sound very fanciful and are  quite often written off,' said Steven Bradberry, executive director  of the New Orleans-based Alliance Institute, which hosted the  delegation.  'This is what we're going for with these centers of excellence, where  we can have people who are familiar with the various toxins and the  effects of toxins. . . so that patients can have somewhere in the region  where they can get information on [the symptoms] they are observing,'  Bradberry said. Their appeal has critical timing, as the explosive budget debate  currently rocking Capital Hill has been rife with calls to slash  funds for programmes like Medicare, that are crucial to the  livelihoods of low-income oil spill victims with new health concerns. 'We think it's a serious crisis and the federal government needs to  grab hold of this in a more aggressive way and provide the  wherewithal to make sure that the hundreds of thousands of people who  were impacted by the spill have their health care protected,' Phil  Johnston, chair of the RFK Center's board of directors, emphasised. Little mention was made of BP and its partners who, already facing  possible legal ramifications for the disaster, pledged a 20-billion- dollar compensation fund to protect those impacted by the spill. Earlier this month, U. S.  Attorney General Eric Holder informed Ken  Feinberg, the man appointed to administer BP-related claims after his  highly esteemed work with the September 11 Compensation Fund, that  the Justice Department would initiate an independent audit based on  complaints about the transparency of Feinberg's claims process. A brief filed Monday called the process an 'abject failure,' and  cited that the fund has so far paid only 16 percent of interim claims  filed. A recent study carried out by Advocates for Environmental Rights  (AEHR) reported a discrepancy in the way Feinberg administered claims  from previous disaster funds that were paid out with tax payer  dollars - like 9/11 - with claims for the BP Oil Spill Compensation  Fund, whose payments are siphoned from BP's own piggy bank. 'We found that in past disasters, the folks who were filing claims  did not have to show proof of causation.  All they had to do was say  they were ill, they were at this place or in this location, and so it  was.  Their claims were taken care of,' Michele Roberts, campaign and  policy coordinator for AEHR, told IPS. However, in the case of the BP Oil Spill Compensation Fund, Gulf  residents have learned that their claims are denied if they cannot  provide proof that BP and its dispersant are the exact cause of their  illness, Roberts said, calling the inconsistency 'a direct human  rights violation. 'Rolfes is equally unimpressed with BP's compensation efforts. 'You look around, you don't see health clinics, all you see are BP- sponsored ads around town and in newspapers that say everything is  fine,' Rolfes told IPS.  'It's not fine.  Until I see health centres  being built in every parish where there was an impact, I haven't seen  an adequate response. ''What we need is healthcare now and that should be funded by BP,'  Rolfes added.  'It's not right for the tax payer to pick up the tab  for BP's oil disaster. '