As record-breaking temperature highs and rapidly melting ice  caps fuel fears about impending 'water wars', some experts in  Washington say that the threat of full-blown conflict is  exaggerated, adding that robust institutions and solid  treaties could transform water crises into international  cooperation. The planet is currently home to 276 international river basins, which  cover almost a half of the earth's land surface and are home to 40  percent of the global population. Many of these basins cross boundaries with no regard for the  incendiary politics that divide nations, religions and peoples.  In  fact, a full 80 percent of the world's fresh water originates in  basins shared by two or more countries. However, while the risk of water wars has long made headlines, new  research suggests that possible cooperation over shared resources  would be a better, and more accurate, message. 'Those of us who work on issues of international water management see  only the boundaries of watersheds themselves, we see the things that  unite us, that bring us together,' Aaron Wolf, a professor of  geography at the University of Oregon, told a panel at the Woodrow  Wilson International Center for Scholars in Washington on Thursday. 'We understand that everything - surface water, water quantity, water  quality, populations that lives in the basin, the wildlife — is all  connected together,' said Wolf, adding that history offers very few  examples of declared armed hostilities over water itself, the only  unambiguous case being a conflict almost 4,500 years ago. Much more prevalent, Wolf argues, has been the signing of treaties on  the issue of shared basins. The Transboundary Freshwater Dispute Database (TFDD), a project of  Oregon State University's Department of Geosciences in partnership  with the Northwest Alliance for Computation Science, carried out  extensive research into the history of water-related conflict,  referencing over 3,600 international treaties signed between the  years 805-1997. Rating water-related events between the years 1948-2008, the database  found only 21 cases of 'extensive military acts' compared to 682  instances of 'mild verbal support' for treaties.  The same period also  witnessed the signing of 145 treaties on shared water resources. Jim Duncan, a consultant to the World Bank and co-author of the  Bank's 2010 report 'Mapping the Resilience of International River  Basins to Future Climate Change-Induced Water Variability', believes  that, though climate fluctuations are contributing to increasingly  tense relationships in the hydropolitical sphere, the possibility of  open hostilities or conflict is directly proportional to the ability  of institutions to mitigate those changes. In fact, Wolfe claims, 'The likelihood of conflict rises as the rate  of change within the basin exceeds the institutional capacity to  absorb that change,' adding that institutions need to form and flex  their muscles in order to stave off water catastrophes; uncoordinated  development, or major projects in the absence of treaties, were much  more likely to cause conflict than creeping climate change. However, not everyone shares this optimism about mitigating water  wars. Matt Zentner, a hydrologist at the U. S.  Department of Defence, said  in Washington Thursday that 1. 4 billion people currently lack access  to safe water, 2. 4 billion people live in situations of grossly  inadequate sanitation and 5. 7 billion people a year perish from  water-borne diseases. The World Bank reported earlier this year that 2. 8 billion people  live in areas of high 'water stress', a number that is expected to  hit 3. 9 billion — half the world's population — by 2030. Every minute, 15 children die from unsafe drinking water, the bulk of  them in the developing world.  Meanwhile, 2,400 litres of fresh water  are required to produce every single hamburger, which are consumed at  the rate of 75 per second, according to McDonald's. Put another way, the average person living in arid lands on the  continent of Africa uses 10-40 litres of water a day, compared to the  300-600 litres guzzled by European or North Americans living in urban  centres. These dramatic inequalities in access, experts argue, cannot be  maintained without conflict. Referencing a 2010 Senate report presented to the U. S.  Committee on  Foreign Relations in February, the founder of Green Growth Leaders  Erik Rasmussen stressed in an article last month that '[The] growing  water scarcity is a primary driver for insecurity, instability and  conflicts and is currently setting the stage for future water wars -  unless global action is taken. 'Little-known facts about the supply of fresh water in the world today  appear to verify Rasmussen's fears. According to the U. N.  Educational, Scientific and Cultural  Organisation (UNESCO), only one percent of fresh water - less than  0. 007 percent of all the water in the world - is easily accessible.   Underground water tables, or aquifers, take 1,400 years to be fully  replenished.  Given the mismanagement of water for agricultural  production — accounting for 70 percent of all water withdrawals — an  impending crisis looks all the more likely. Back in 2009, Colin Chartres, the director general of the  International Water Management Institute (IWMI), said that a 'nothing  short of a blue revolution' would be necessary to meet the water  challenges of the 21st century.  Actions thus far have not met this  call. 'The current state of affairs demands that we act now,' Rasmussen  said.  'We need a new way of thinking about water.  We need to stop  depleting our water resources, and urge water conservation on a  global scale. ''We need to ensure 'more crop per drop', Rasmussen added.  'While many  developing countries use precious water to grow one tonne of rice per  hectare, other countries produce five tonnes per hectare under  similar social and water conditions, but with better technology and  management. ''Thus, if we behave intelligently, and collaborate between  neighbours, between neighbouring countries, between North and South,  and in the global trading system, we shall not 'run out of water'.  If  we do not, and 'business as usual' prevails, then water wars will  accelerate,' he concluded. 