The Society for International Development (SID)'s triennial  World Congress, which concluded Sunday in Washington, drew  over 1,000 attendees this year, 40 percent hailing from the  global south, making it arguably one of the most influential  and far-reaching forums for development experts and  organisations in the world today. 'The emergence of new paths to development has [grown] along with the  rise of middle- and low-income countries,' Rebeca Grynspan, associate  administrator of the U. N.  Development Programme, said at the opening  plenary here on Friday. 'But we have seen that we can also have growth without inclusion.  In  Latin America, for example, one in every four young people is not  studying or working - 25 percent out of the education system and out  of the labour market.  If that's not exclusion, then I don't know what  is,' she said. Referring to the fast-approaching 2015 deadline for achieving the  Millennium Development Goals (MDGs), Grynspan added, 'Now we need to  start thinking about growth without exclusion. 'Grynspan stressed that the empowerment of women was essential to the  solid development of global international economies, a sentiment  echoed by many others at the congress. 'On Oct.  31, we will be a world of seven billion, which is sobering  to think about,' Babatunde Osotimehin, executive director of the  United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA), said at a panel dedicated to  assessing challenges and approaches to achieving the MDGs.  'Of this,  1. 8 billion will be young people, 90 percent of them in the  developing world. ''Half of these will be young women, 50 percent of whom will be in  vulnerable situations, living without access to education or health.   If these people are going to be the caretakers of the world, then we  need to invest heavily in their education, including sexual and  reproductive education and access to information and services,' he  stressed. While many participants at the Congress articulated the importance of  increased private sector investment, others urged the need for swift  and radical changes in the face of unprecedented ecological and  humanitarian meltdowns. Speaking at a panel on sustainable human development at the Congress  on Friday, Sanjay Reddy, a professor of economics at the New School  for Social Research in New York, said, 'What we need is a much more  profound concern with how we can bring about structural changes in  our economies and societies. ''When we talk of 'sustainability' we are [often discussing] what  would be required to maintain certain levels of consumption for human  beings with the notion that that level of consumption which is  sustained should be as high as possible,' Reddy told IPS.    'We'll have to define the goal much more broadly if we are concerned  with non-human life, with sentient beings or if we believe that there  are other obligations that humans have on earth which go beyond what  human beings can derive from the earth for our own satisfactions. 'A group of scientists and researchers echoed Reddy's critique of the  'anthropocentrism' of development at a panel on Saturday entitled  'Pathways to Sustainability — meeting people's needs while protecting  and conserving the environment. 'Alex Dehgan, science and technology advisor to the administrator at  the U. S.  Agency for International Development, said that 90 percent  of changes tracked in 28,000 biological processes were related to  climate change. He added that there has been a stunning 'loss of biodiversity, loss  of pollinators, increase [of] invasive species, loss of economically  important species and colony collapse disorder [among bees]'. 'Human beings are losing the very structures that allow us to feed  ourselves,' Dehgan said. SID's mission statement describes it as an organisation founded for  the purpose of 'advancing equitable development by bringing diverse  constituencies together to debate critical [issues] that will shape  the global future. ''SID has been very successful in the past in providing neutral ground  in which bona fide dialogue could take place between diverse actors,  many of whom had loyalties and connections to indigenous  perspectives,' Reddy told IPS. 'So I was disappointed to see that this year's meeting, hosted by the  Washington Chapter, was dominated by the Northern development  professionals, in particular those who appear to be engaged in for- profit contracting to execute development projects on behalf of  organisations such as USAID. 'Reddy added that, if genuine grassroots development were to take  place, SID should return to its original role of facilitating  discussions between diverse groups, including voices that call for  radically alternative methods to the current neoliberal agenda. 