Matashichi Oishi, 78, a radiation victim from Bikini Atoll, the site of a U. S.   hydrogen bomb test in 1954, will make his annual lone visit this week to  commemorate the Aug.  6 anniversary of the nuclear bombing of Hiroshima 66  years ago. This year, says the former sailor, battling lung cancer from exposure to high levels of radiation at Bikini  Atoll, his message at Hiroshima will go beyond a routine call to end nuclear weapons.  'Against the backdrop of the disastrous Fukushima nuclear plant accident, I will speak of the absolute  need for Japan to not only work to ban nuclear weapons but also to completely eradicate dependence  on nuclear energy,' he told IPS.  Oishi’s planned speech echoes the emergence of nuclear energy as an equal threat to peace.  It gains  credence from the massive earthquake and tsunami that hit Fukushima and the northeast coasts of  Japan on Mar.  11, severely damaging the nuclear plant located there.  Hiroshima became the world’s first atom-bombed city when the United Stated dropped a uranium bomb  that exploded and killed almost its entire population instantly in 1945.  The atomic bombing anniversary has long made Hiroshima and Nagasaki city, that was similarly  devastated within three days, potent symbols of world peace.  The cities are unrivalled leaders in the  nuclear disarmament movement. Like Oishi, the thousands of peace activists, officials and politicians who will rally at Hiroshima to  declare their commitment towards a world without nuclear weapons, will also call for a ban on nuclear  energy.  A press release by the Mayor of Hiroshima, Kazumi Matsui and his Nagasaki counterpart, Tomihisa  Taue, makes the agenda clear.   Drafts of their speeches, released to the media, refer to the catastrophe faced by the people in  Fukushima, and appeal to the government to promote renewable energy sources. Matsui is quoted in the Japanese press as saying: 'The central government should take responsibility to  deal with the nuclear power generation issue. 'Indeed, Oishi points out that a ban on nuclear power has been his lonely cry for the last six decades.  He  was 19 years old and sailing on a tuna boat when the U. S.  carried out the bomb test that radiated his  crew and forced the massive evacuation of residents from the surrounding islands.  The incident created an uproar in Japan, but given the political sensitivity at that time - the Cold War  and a race to develop nuclear weapons development between the former Soviet Union and the U. S.  -  Oishi and his colleagues were forced to abandon the pursuit of justice.  Fourteen of the 23 Japanese crew on board the ‘Lucky Dragon’ contracted cancer, and ten died of it.  For Ayako Ooga, who lives in a temporary shelter in Aizu, 150 km from the damaged reactors in  Fukushima, her former home, the upcoming Hiroshima anniversary is a time for solidarity.   'We must join hands with other victims like Oishi because we ourselves have become radiation victims,'  she said. Prof.  Michiji Konuma, who heads the Japan-based World Peace Appeal group, explained that the  Fukushima disaster has reinforced the importance of raising public awareness about the dark side of  nuclear energy.  Konuma, a physicist, has long campaigned to highlight the risks to human health posed by radiation.  To  him, the sobering lesson of Fukushima is that it is the fourth nuclear disaster to hit the Japanese  people, counting Bikini Island, Hiroshima and Nagasaki.   'The human tragedy of the past disaster that included fatalities, cancer and other radiation induced  diseases, as well as the widespread discrimination faced by the survivors, illustrate the hidden and  lingering problems of nuclear power,' he said. 'We must sustain the awareness raised by Fukushima and speak out about the dangers we face if we  continue to pursue nuclear energy,' he added.  Konuma represents a panel of intellectuals in Japan that issued a notice to the government in July,  calling for a shift away from dependence on nuclear energy.   The group is also spearheading a public movement to bring in a long-needed debate on the safety  aspects of nuclear power in Japan with the aim of creating deeper understanding at the citizen level. 'The difficult aspect of sustaining an anti-nuclear energy public mood can only be met if more  stakeholders - from intellectuals to radiation victims - get together.  We must not repeat the mistake of  forgetting again,' he said. Oishi agrees.  'My own story shows how lonely the struggle is in Japan to get the authorities to listen to  victims who stay silent for fear of being discriminated against,' he said.   