In Shishmaref, an Inupiaq village on an Alaskan barrier island  north of the Bering Strait, a way of life is gradually  disappearing due to higher temperatures, rising sea levels,  declining numbers of sea animals to hunt, and shrinking  shorelines wrought by climate change. The effects of climate change may be felt across the globe, but in  the United States, compared to the general population, indigenous  peoples feel the impact disproportionately, a report published  Wednesday by the National Wildlife Federation concluded. Because they are dependent on it for their social, cultural, and  economic welfare, 'indigenous people… have a unique relationship to  the natural system in which they live,' Kim Gottschalk, staff  attorney for the Native American Rights Fund, told reporters  Wednesday.  As a result, 'they are the first to be affected' by changes in the  climate and physical world, he added. The average 45 percent unemployment rate among Tribes means that the  added costs and damage, both social and economic, resulting from  climate change only exacerbate the struggles for communities facing  high rates of poverty.  Some 565 federally recognised Tribes exist in  the United States, which has an American Indian and Alaska Native  population of 3. 2 million. In several tribal areas of the U. S. , such as Wyoming's Wind River  Reservation, and sections of Washington state home to Hoh, Quinault,  and Quileute Tribes, and other sections of the Pacific Northwest  inhabited by Tulalip Tribes, changing water flow or glacial melting  patterns leading to flooding or shifts in river flows are damaging  fisheries and agricultural infrastructure, not to mention homes and  buildings. Funding increases urgedBecause the future promises the intensification of extreme weather -  bigger snowstorms, for instance, or more serious droughts - rather  than its mitigation, the report suggested greater funding to Tribes  as the most effective means of dealing with the consequences of  climate change. 'Increasing the resiliency of public and private infrastructure… can  provide a cushion when extreme weather and climate events occur,' the  report recommended. But climate change adaptation planning requires significant financial  resources, as do programmes to educate Tribal youth who will  ultimately deal with the impacts of climate change. Furthermore, in certain programmes, funding for Tribes is managed by  the state, so if a state rejects federal funds, Tribes in that state  can only obtain funding if they prove to the federal government that  the state is not meeting Tribes' needs - an additional hindrance.  'There has been a history of a lack of funding in order to give  Tribes the… financial capacity to participate as they need to as  sovereign partners in addressing this global problem,' Gottschalk  said. Not only would additional funding for programmes to manage the  effects of climate change benefit Tribes, but some also say that  Tribes use those funds more efficiently.  Gary Morishima, a founding member of Our Natural Resources (ONR) - a  coalition of over 30 Tribes and Tribal organisations developing a  strategy to conserve natural resources - pointed out in an interview  with IPS that credible research has shown that 'the funding that's  spent to support the efforts of indigenous communities is far more  effective' than pouring dollars into government-run, bureaucratic  mechanisms.  The report also suggested increasing the energy efficiency of Tribal  houses to reduce energy costs for Indian Tribes, who incur some of  the highest energy costs in the country. Native Americans as partnersNative Americans have lived in harmony with nature for generations,  with 'a tremendous accumulation of knowledge that has been  transmitted and shared' through those generations, Morishima said. 'Interconnection between people and land and resources… is really the  tribal way,' he added. That knowledge is precisely the reason groups such as ONR argue for  involving Tribes and their perspectives when discussing how to deal  with climate change.  What Tribes can contribute are time-proven  practices that are 'sustainable, bountiful and cost effective,' Aguto  told reporters.  'When you combine this knowledge… with modern natural resources  management practices, you will find a highly effective partnership,'  he explained. A World Bank study declared that in Latin America, lands under the  control of indigenous people are less prone to forest fires than  other protected areas.  This example is outstanding proof, Aguto told  IPS, that giving funding to indigenous peoples is an extremely  effective way of preventing forest fires.  Those promoting the inclusion of Tribal perspectives in climate  change discussions argue that this type of knowledge of indigenous  peoples should be applied in other areas of environmental protection. Still, obtaining funding for indigenous peoples so that their  accumulated empirical knowledge can become part of the discussion is  a 'crucial component' in climate change discussions right now, he  added.  Tribes' way of life follows the concept of reciprocity - one takes  resources from the earth but gives back respect and care, Morishima  said.  Current debates on climate change lack that perspective, he  remarked.  For these reasons, the viewpoints and beliefs of indigenous  peoples need to be considered when discussing climate change.  Cooperation between Tribes, NGOs and the government is essential to  combat climate change not only to pool information but also because  Tribes are sovereign nations, Gottschalk emphasised during the  briefing. 'It is absolutely crucial that they be treated as sovereign partners  at nations,' particularly when addressing the effects of climate  change, he added.  On Aug.  9, the United Nations will celebrate the International Day of  the World's Indigenous People.  First celebrated in 1995,  International Day will focus this year on indigenous designs to  highlight the need for preserving indigenous cultures. 