As the world gears up to celebrate the International Day of  the World's Indigenous People on Aug.  9, a joint lawsuit filed  Wednesday in Hawaii's Federal District Court against the  National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) reveals  the interconnectedness of environmental destruction and  violations of native people's rights. Filed by the Hawaiian Environmental Alliance (KAHEA), in conjunction  with the national consumer advocacy group Food and Water Watch (FWW),  the suit challenges a 'fishing gear' permit issued to Kona Blue Water  Farms, by the National Marine Fisheries Service (NMFS), for its open  aquaculture 'aquapods' stationed in the Alenuihaha Channel, off the  west coast of the Big Island. According to a detailed report by FWW entitled 'The Empty Promise of  Ocean Aquaculture in Hawaii', 'open-water aquaculture is the mass  production of fish using floating net pens or cages in the ocean,  similar to the concentrated animal feedlots on land for hogs and  chickens. 'Kona's 'aquapods' — large brass cages composed of meshed netting  stocked with 2,000 small fish, which grow to harvest sizes of six to  eight pounds — are tethered to sailboats and allowed to free float in  the ocean just below surface level. Drifting in eddies off the Channel, sometimes in two-mile deep water,  the aquapods can be anywhere between three to 150 miles offshore. 'We expect that this experiment will have no discernible footprints  at all,' Kelly Coleman, a media spokesperson for Kona Blue, told IPS.   'We are doing this to help promote sustainable aquaculture. 'Far from being convinced, the plaintiffs and members of the local  community are indignant and outraged. 'This is the first ever commercial aquaculture permit for an  aquaculture facility in federal waters,' Zach Corrigan, senior staff  attorney and acting fish programme director of FWW, told IPS. 'We're taking this to court because we don't believe that the federal  government, namely the NMFS, has the authority to issue this permit,'  he said. KAHEA sees the permit as a 'misapplication of commercial fishing  regulations to industrial aquaculture activities'. 'Industrial aquaculture is not 'fishing gear' by any stretch of the  imagination,' Marti Townsend, a spokesperson for the Hawaiian  watchdog group, said in a press release issued Wednesday. She added that existing federal law required authorisation under the  regional Fishery Management Plan before issuance of a fishing permit,  which the defendants did not secure. The complaint further states that the defendants 'acted outside of  their authority and arbitrarily and capriciously in issuing it. 'Hazard to local ecosystems, communitiesThe defendants are also charged with refusing to issue a  comprehensive assessment of the environmental impacts of the  aquaculture venture on marine ecosystems. Back in March, when the government acknowledged that Kona Blue's  project could 'affect several threatened or endangered species', the  project was framed as 'small scale', even though the permit signed  over 7,200 square miles of federal waters to Kona Blue's floating  fish farms. Federal agencies and Kona Blue have consistently referred to the  ocean area off the Big Island's west coast as 'remote', when in fact  it is home to 462 licensed, commercial and subsistence fishermen,  many of them native Hawaiians. 'Kona claims they are going to avoid existing fishing areas through  complex satellite technology and geographical information systems,'  Corrigan told IPS, 'but what they fail to realise is that local  fishing areas don't show up in high-tech searches. ''This puts the onus almost entirely on local fisherman to stay clear  of the area, a consequence that should have [at least] been the  subject of a public hearing,' he added. KAHEA, who filed the lawsuit on behalf of its members in the local  community, blasted Kona Blue's practices as ethnocentric and highly  disrespectful of ancient and traditional forms of fishing that are  still very much alive on the Big Island. 'It's offensive to Hawaiians to raise fish in this monoculture style,  when they have a strong tradition of aquaculture using fish ponds  close to shore that house multiple species of herbivore fish,  essentially creating a microcosm of the overall ocean's ecosystem,'  Townsend told IPS. 'Since these ponds are built at the mouths of fresh water streams,  the fish are far less susceptible to diseases.  Kona's cages strip the  fish of access to fresh water, so they are then forced to use  antibiotics to treat the inevitable diseases that spring from these  artificial conditions,' she added. Townsend stressed that KAHEA was also concerned about the impacts of  soybean feed on water quality, and the dangers of introducing  chemical treatments and antibiotics into the ocean. 'It's bad policy to experiment in such a large area, especially when  lessons learned from commercial aquaculture ventures in places like  Thailand or Canada — which have caused serious problems with water  quality and wild fish stocks — give us good reason to worry,' she  said. Kale Gumapac, Alaka'i for the Kanaka Council Moku O Keawe, expressed  deep sadness with the industrialisation of fishing and warned that  Kona Blue's practices presented a grave threat to the centuries-old  practices of Na Po'e Kanaka, or native Hawaiian people. 'Kona Blue sells its aquaculture venture as 'sustainable', but how  can this be true when it is costing tax payers huge amounts of money  and eating up large chunks of federal government funds?' Gumapac  asked IPS, referring to the 3. 3 million dollars in public subsidies  that the company has benefitted from — directly or indirectly — thus  far. A statement issued by the Kanaka Council outlining the dire  implications of Kona Blue's practices include the disruption of  gathering rights on ancient fishing grounds; a breach of religious  freedom, particularly the slaughter of a 16-foot tiger shark in 2005,  one of the most sacred creatures in Hawaiian culture; environmental  damage wrought by the injection of land-based grains and chicken  protein into the ocean; and encroachment onto Hawaiian land. 'History shows that our rights were and continue to be protected by  the Hawaiian Kingdom's Declaration of Rights in 1839,' the Council  wrote in its statement.  'These rights were not limited to the land,  but included the ocean. ''We support this lawsuit, and hope to see an end to the serious  infringement of traditional cultural, religious and economic rights  of our people,' Gumapac told IPS.  