While the exit of the Al-Qaeda-backed rebel group Al Shabaab  has led to the first U. N.  relief airlift in five years in the  capital of famine-wracked Somalia, the situation for women and  children remains precarious, humanitarian workers warn. 'We have heard very sad stories of women having to abandon their  children along the way because they were too weak to carry them,'  Andreas Needham, a public information officer for the U. N.  High  Commissioner for Refugees in Somalia (UNHCR), told IPS. The latest developments in Mogadishu are a 'step in the right  direction', Augustine Mahiga, U. N.  Secretary-General Ban-Ki Moon's  envoy to Somalia, said in an e-mailed statement on Aug.  6.  'Real  security risks, including from terrorist attacks, remain and must not  be underestimated. 'Three more areas in southern Somalia were added to the famine zone in  the past week, and the U. N.  warns that without urgent intervention,  all of southern Somalia will be engulfed in famine. The drought that struck the area was worsened by the presence of the  armed militia group, active for almost 20 years.  'Many women lost  their husbands while fighting, and they're widows now that may find  themselves in a worse situation than where they were before,' Needham  said.  As Matthew Johnson, a press officer at the U. S.  Agency for  International Development (USAID), told IPS, 'Under Somali culture,  women face the extra burden of societal expectations that they bear  the primary duty to care for and sustain their families, especially  children and the elderly, which is a superhuman burden in times of  extreme scarcity and insecurity. 'What has been declared the worst famine in the last 60 years in the  area has so far cost the lives of more than 29,000 children and left  another 640,000 people malnourished.  But dying of starvation is just the tip of the iceberg, one of the  many dangers that women and children face on a daily base.  According to Janusz Czerniejewski, head of Intersos at the Kenya and  Somalia Mission, conflict over scarce resources increases during  drought, putting women and children at higher risk of experiencing  sexual violence.  'As they flee Somalia to safety, women and children are passing  through areas where armed groups and bandits roam, only to arrive in  crowded and potentially dangerous camps.  The protection aspects of  this crisis are acute and life-threatening.  Gender-based violence  (GBV) like rape, domestic violence and female genital mutilation is a  significant issue in all parts of Somalia,' he told IPS. A report released by the International Rescue Committee in July  showed that violence against women and girls is a serious danger even  after they reach the camps, particularly when they must leave to  collect firewood or use the forest as a latrine. Research on sexual violence undertaken by the Protection Monitoring  Network (PMN) covering 600 reported cases of rape showed that after a  period of six months, 10 percent of the assaulted women committed  suicide and 25 percent disappeared. Johnson said that when many women reach refugee camps, they are  forced to assume a role they are not culturally adjusted to, and  often lack confidence to perform, as effective heads of the family in  the absence of male relatives. Currently, the U. N.  children's agency UNICEF is scaling up operations  to meet the rising humanitarian needs of Somali children and families  in the Dadaab refugee camps in Kenya and the surrounding communities. Somali refugees arrive in Dadaab at an average rate of 1,300 per day.   Eighty percent of them are women and children.  The total population  of the three camps near Dadaab is now more than 400,000, becoming the  new third largest city in Kenya. 'Many Somali families who cross into Kenya at Liboi do not realise  they must walk another 100 kilometres before arriving at the refugee  camps in Dadaab,' said Olivia Yambi, UNICEF Kenya representative.  'The health of some malnourished children crossing at Liboi is so  precarious that they simply cannot wait until they get to Dadaab for  treatment,' she added.  For that reason, UNICEF has increased supplies of ready-to-use  therapeutic food to hospitals and nutrition stabilisation centres in  the Dadaab camps and surrounding host communities for the treatment  of malnutrition in children under five.  UNICEF has dispatched medicines to existing health centres, including  health kits sufficient to support about 10,000 people. 'The positioning of health and nutritional supplies close to the  border will save children's lives that might otherwise have been lost  on the long journey to Dadaab,' Yambi said. Over 100,000 children have already been vaccinated thanks to the  UNICEF's support to integrated campaigns for measles and polio  immunisation in different host camps. 'We are acting now because these diseases can spread very quickly in  overcrowded conditions like we have now in the camps,' said Ibrahim  Conteh, UNICEF Dadaab emergency coordinator. In education, UNICEF is planning to construct 146 new learning  centres in the outskirts of the camps to accommodate newly-arrived  refugees. UNICEF estimates it will need almost 315 million dollars over the  next six months to scale up operations to reach children in the  affected areas with emergency and preventative assistance.  