More than a year after a private company operating in public  waters retched 170 million gallons of crude and two million  gallons of toxic dispersants into the Gulf of Mexico, creating  an environmental catastrophe, we still lack reliable  statistics on the BP oil disaster's impact on the health of  residents. I recently spent several days travelling across the Gulf Coast region  of Louisiana, Mississippi and Alabama, speaking with fishermen,  oystermen, shrimpers, restaurant workers, and neighbours about the  illnesses they have suffered in the wake of this calamity.  I couldn't help but think of the trip that my father, Robert Kennedy,  made to the Mississippi Delta in 1967.  That trip transformed him.  He  was horrified by the poverty, the children whose bellies were  'swollen with hunger'; he believed we had a duty, as a nation, to  relieve their suffering and soothe their pain. He returned to Washington determined to extend food stamps to the  poorest Americans, despite a cash-strapped administration and an  unyielding Congress.  Today, the children and grandchildren of those  very same families continue to suffer from systemic governmental  neglect, the debilitating heritage of communities - African-American,  Vietnamese, Laotian, Native American, and poor white - marginalised  by skin colour, religion, education level, income, or access to  power.  It is long past time for federal action. Our delegation was hosted by RFK Human Rights Award Laureate Stephen  Bradberry, executive director of the New Orleans-based Alliance  Institute.  Stephen has been a community organiser in New Orleans'  Lower Ninth Ward and across the Gulf for 25 years, empowering  communities to demand what is rightfully theirs.  In Jean Lafitte, Louisiana, Mayor Tim Kerner told us that he and his  son were on the water throughout the disaster.  He said: 'I encouraged  everyone in this town to put out booms and work night and day to stop  that oil from destroying our community. 'But now, so many of his people are ill, he's afraid his neighbours  will say, 'We wouldn't have listened to you and kept our jobs if we  knew it would kill us. ' With no access to a specialist in toxicology, Mayor Kerner is fearful  that he, his son, his family, and friends will suffer long-term  impacts of exposure to the toxins that will be discovered in years to  come.  He wants his town to be diagnosed now, so they can get the  medical treatment they deserve, and avoid what might, in a few years,  be a community-wide epidemic.  Our delegation met two brothers who said their families had been  fishing for five generations.  Both they and their family members have  endured excruciating lung, skin, and digestive-tract ailments in the  wake of the BP disaster.  When one man's infant grandson ran a high  fever, his daughter-in-law panicked and brought the child to the  emergency room.  Self-employed and uninsured, he faced a bill of 2,300  dollars.  With shrimp yields the lowest in memory, he wonders how he  will pay.  From a community east of Coden, Alabama, the closest health care  facility is more than 40 miles away.  Public transportation is  virtually non-existent.  One resident told me: 'We just can't afford  to take a day off of work, pay for gas, and then pay up to 120  dollars for a doctor's appointment. ' So people wait for the emergency  room, and that is 260 dollars each visit.  In Biloxi, Mississippi, a fisherman named Kwan said he was on a  cleanup crew for BP, and he and his fellow fishermen have had rashes  across their bodies ever since, which itch until they bleed.  In that  city, the health care facility is so over-booked, it takes up to  three months for a doctor's appointment, and the same wait for a  follow-up visit.  Catfish Miller, another fisherman, also worked on the clean-up crew  for BP.  He was denied gloves, a respirator, eyewear, or any form of  protective gear.  He suffered searing headaches, ear infections, sores  in his nose and throat, and bleeding from every orifice in his body  for months on end.  He said no doctor he went to would tie his  ailments to toxic poisoning.  Many of those who sought care have been belittled when they've  mentioned BP, and dismissed as delusional or depressed.  We heard dozens of people across the region talk about similar health  problems and obstacles to care.  There are many reasons. The full spectrum of chemicals used in the dispersants was made  public in June 2011, only after requests consistently denied led to  extensive litigation. Few doctors in the region are willing to tie ailments to BP, or even  diagnose toxic poisoning.  When we visited the Jefferson County health  care facility in Louisiana, Executive Director Yakima Black offered  her insights. She pointed out that local doctors generally lack access to the  expertise, training, and equipment to diagnose toxic poisoning and  they don't want to be called as an expert witness in a lawsuit with  BP.  They are afraid of malpractice suits and will not treat patients  unless they have specialty training, adding to the disincentives to  diagnose. And, with most patients self-employed and uninsured, few can afford  the expensive tests and medicines necessary to show causation and  obtain proper care.  In addition, we heard an abundance of confusion  about insurance coverage availability.  Last year, President Barack Obama pledged that Gulf residents would  be 'made whole'.  To honour that pledge, Congress must ensure that  health care is adequate, affordable, proximate and available; that  health care workers are trained to diagnose, track, and treat toxic  poisoning; and that the people of the Gulf are treated with respect,  no matter what their background. There is a solution.  Sen.  Edward M.  Kennedy signed the first federal  law providing community health care centres to people in need.  Today,  23 million Americans depend on those centres for care.  Under health  care legislation passed last year, the centres would expand to  include 40 million Americans, many of them in the Gulf Coast. If Republicans in Congress don't make real on their threat to  decimate the progress that's already been made, the people of the  Gulf might stand a chance.  First responders to the 9/11 tragedy did not have to prove causation  in order to get treatment, they only had to show they were in the  vicinity of the terrorist attack.  Similarly, the 150,000-strong  cleanup crew who sacrificed themselves, and their families and  neighbours who live along the Gulf Coast should not have to prove  that their symptoms are caused by BP's catastrophe, only that they  were there.  When I joined the RFK Center delegation to the Gulf Coast a year ago,  Alabaman Louise Bosarge cited President Obama's reference to the  resiliency of Gulf Coast residents, who have endured four natural  disasters and one man-made catastrophe in five years - Hurricanes  Katrina, Rita, Gustav, Ivan and now, BP.  'We are resilient,' she  said.  'We always bounce back.  Bouncing hurts. ' It's time for us to provide the families of the Gulf Coast with the  health care they deserve.  *Kerry Kennedy is president of the Robert F.  Kennedy Center for  Justice and Human Rights. 