With political will to dramatically cut the world's greenhouse  gas emissions failing to materialise, a multi-pronged approach  is needed to protect the millions of people who are being  displaced as a result of environmental factors driven largely  by climate change, experts say. 'Climate change is looming as a potentially very serious and  underappreciated complicating factor when it comes to international  displacement,' said Erika Feller, the assistant high commissioner for  protection in the office of the U. N.  High Commissioner for Refugees. More is needed from the international community to address this  challenge 'in a coordinated and pragmatic manner', she told IPS. Of paramount importance is that national authorities play a central  role in developing appropriate responses to both the internal and  external dimensions of climate-related displacement, while affected  persons and communities must be made fully aware of their rights and  given opportunities to participate in decision-making, Feller said. 'Decisions about where, when and how to relocate communities, for  example, must be made in consultation with the affected populations  and be sensitive to cultural and ethnic identities and boundaries to  avoid possible tensions and conflicts,' she added. Staying close to homeThe overwhelming majority of people who are displaced by environmental  factors become internally displaced persons (IDPs) within their own  countries.  Just a fraction will likely cross international borders,  said Michele Klein-Solomon, director of the Migration Policy, Research  and Communications Department at the International Organisation for  Migration (IOM). '[The latter group tends to move] from countries in the South, in the  developing world, to other countries in the 'less emitting world', and  it is also not likely to be the most vulnerable who move,' she  explained. More frequent and severe floods, storms, landslides or land  degradation, droughts and water shortages — so called slow-onset  natural and human-made disasters — can all be triggers for migration. Those most in need of protection tend to lack sufficient resources to  adapt to the new living conditions, and that can include an inability  to move away or migrate to other countries. Speaking at a conference at Columbia Law School in May on migration  and climate change, Klein-Solomon stressed that it was important to  grasp these facts to counter 'the overwhelming fears of the developed  world being awash with people who are coming into their countries,  taking jobs and burdening social security mechanisms'. Even under worst case scenarios, in which some 250 million people  could be displaced due to climate change over the next 25 to 30 years,  it still would be 'a tiny portion of the world's population', she  said. 'We are really not talking about enormous numbers relative to global  populations and we are not talking about hordes of people flooding  into the Western, industrialised, developed countries.  We do not need  further repressive legislation and xenophobic debates as a result of  this discussion,' she added. Few legal protectionsRapid-onset disasters attract far more attention from the media,  policymakers and researchers than gradual environmental changes — such  as the human consequences of rising sea levels, soil salination,  deforestation and desertification. Precise estimates on climate-induced migration are hard to come by.   However, recent events such as last year's nationwide flooding in  Pakistan, severe mudslides following heavy rainfall in Brazil and  Colombia this spring, and the ongoing humanitarian disaster in  drought-hit Somalia show that millions of people are already being  driven from their homes and property due to extreme weather patterns.  International protection strategies are often marked by a humanitarian  focus on 'the immediate need of the person without necessarily looking  at the causes of the phenomenon nor to a response in a longer term,'  said Paola Pace, acting head of the International Migration Law Unit  at IOM's International Cooperation and Partnerships Department. When emergencies occur, immediate funding is provided which lasts  about three to six months, but for the subsequent 'recuperation phase'  it is very difficult to find donor support.  This wastes the knowledge  acquired in the initial months and squanders an opportunity to 'really  tackle the causes that brought about that emergency', Pace stressed in  an interview with IPS. The lack of a long-term strategy is a major problem for those seeking  to protect and support affected populations.  A better approach would  go beyond basic needs — food, water, shelter — to address trauma and  stress-induced illnesses, and provide opportunities for sustainable  development in a new environment, she said. The climate-displaced also face an uncertain legal situation.  Neither  international humanitarian law nor international refugee law has a  legal definition for this group, making it difficult to hold  governments responsible for their wellbeing. Often, there are multiple, complex, interconnected factors at work,  from extreme weather events to land degradation or sea-level rise, and  identifying the exact culprit is impossible. '[I]t is a bit like the straw that broke the camel's back,' said Jane  McAdams, an expert on refugees and international migration law at the  University of New South Wales. 'Climate change is never the only reason why people move, there are  always other factors like underlying socioeconomic conditions, for  example,' she told IPS. Finding appropriate legal and policy responses requires a combination  of strategies, 'rather than an either/or approach', she said. While there is no single legal standard specifically addressing  environmental migrants, the IOM's Pace stressed that should not give a  'wrong impression' that no framework applies. 'Before a person becomes a migrant she or he is a human being,' and  entitled to every protection under human rights law, she said. 