In a country where the going rate for a contract killing is around Thai baht  15,000 (500 dollars), the price paid to eliminate Thongnak Sawekchinda, an  environmental activist, has caught the police by surprise. 'The 10,000 dollars paid to kill Thongnak is quite a lot for Thailand,' admits Col.  Chaicharn  Purathanont, who is leading the police investigation in Samut Sakhon, a province outside Bangkok with  a range of industries using coal which was - the focus of the Sawekchinda’s activism.  The money was distributed among seven men assembled to target Thongnak, 47, says the colonel,  spreading a crumpled sheet of paper on his glass-topped desk.  It is a photocopy containing the  pictures, names and role of each man involved in the killing. Yothin Theprian, the alleged gunman on that list of suspects, has already turned himself in.  Police say  he was paid 1,333 dollars for shooting Thongnak as the activist sat outside his noodles shop on the  morning of Jul.  28. The investigation has frustrated the victim’s friends, including fellow activist Chanchai Rungrotsakorn.   'We think there are more powerful people above those the police have identified.  There are connections,  networks, local businesses and politics. ' Chanchai, who has been involved in the five-year-old campaign led by Thongnak to end transportation  of coal into the province, sees the rapid spread of this polluting industry across Samut Sakhon as a sign  of the power of the nexus.  Samut Sakhon has an estimated 114 factories with coal-fired boilers, and some of the companies in the  coal import and distribution trade here are listed on the Thai stock exchange - the country’s largest  coal operators among them. There is no stopping such powerful companies.  This Southeast Asian kingdom has a troubling record of  27 environmental activists killed in the past 16 years — yet none of the 'masterminds' has been held to  account, say green groups. 'The justice system cannot reach these people,' Tara Buakamsri, Southeast Asia campaign director for  Greenpeace, the global environmental lobby, told IPS.  'The few people who have been arrested — and  that is also rare — have been smaller operatives. 'This climate of impunity, he says, has been most evident in cases where activists have been killed after  taking on powerful companies that are polluting the environment in the provinces.  Recent victims include Buddhist monk Supoj Suvajoe, killed for trying to save land from a development  project; Pakvipa Chalermkin, shot dead for campaigning against sand transportation, and Supol  Sirichan, murdered for leading a local community protest against illegal timber logging. It explains why local communities are reluctant to protest against private sector dominated projects that  pollute the fields, homes and atmosphere in rural and semi-urban settings.  'People in the provinces do not feel safe when they come out to protest,' says Chariya Senpong at  Greenpeace’s Thailand office.  'They know of environmental activists getting killed and nothing being  done. 'Environmental conflicts in Thailand have ranged from protests against polluting industrial estates,  deforestation, industrial waste management and concessions for stone mills to destruction of  mangroves.  Grassroots protests against the toxic trail left by the coal industry are more recent, but increasing, as  Thailand turns to this fossil fuel to meet its energy needs.  It imported 10 million tonnes from Indonesia  last year. Local protests have recorded successes too.  Work on a copper mine and a potash mine in two provinces  across north-east Thailand have come to a standstill following strong opposition from grassroots  groups.  Last year, communities affected by pollution from one of Thailand’s largest industrial estates succeeded  in securing a court victory, forcing companies with billion dollar investments to mend their ways.  But such successes are few and far between.  Thongnak’s death has served as a grim reminder about  how environmental issues attract the national media only when the leader of a protest is attacked or  killed.  'The conflicts have always been between local activists and ordinary people in remote places standing  up against big projects and corporate interests,' says Sunai Phasuk, Thai researcher for Human Rights  Watch, the New York-based global rights lobby. 'There is no interest from the state and even from the mainstream media about these tensions, because  big business has been accepted and recognised as an important part of the Thai state’s national  development,' Phasuk told IPS.  'These conflicts are seen as isolated local problems, and the activists are viewed as nuisance,  troublemakers or in the worst case branded as enemies of the state,' Phasuk added.    Jomkwan Sawekchinda, Thongnak’s widow, rejects such labels.  'Thongnak became an activist only after  the coal pollution began,' she said in a soft voice outside a Buddhist temple where mourners were  gathering to pray.  'He was afraid that coal would affect the community in this generation and the next,' she said.   