The world's water map is being significantly redrawn due  primarily to the mass migration of people into urban centres,  threatening one of life's vital resources. By 2050, the world's urban population is estimated to be of the same  size as the total global population today: a staggering six billion  plus. 'The problem is not that cities are growing, the challenge most often  is where they are growing,' Anders Berntell, executive director of  the Stockholm International Water Institute (SIWI), told IPS. A majority of people migrating to and being born in cities are in  regions that already are experiencing water stress, and 95 percent of  urban expansion will occur in developing countries, he predicted. Berntell, who will be presiding over the 21st annual World Water Week  in the Swedish capital beginning next week, pointed out that in less  than 20 years, African and Asian cities will host twice as many  people as they did at the turn of the century. The theme of this year's conference will be: 'Responding to Global  Changes: Water in an Urbanising World'. In an interview with IPS, Berntell said the traditional approach, to  dig deeper and pump farther to meet increasing demand for water, will  not work for most places — rather, 'it will lead to devastated  ecosystems and eventually, depressed economies that need water to  function. ' Excerpts from the interview follow. Q: How severe will be the impact of rapid urbanisation on water  supplies in the next decade?  A: Perhaps the more important question to address is how water will  impact urban growth over the next decade and that will depend on the  choices that cities make today.  Cities in dry regions that plan for  their immediate, mid- and long-term futures can avoid potential  disasters and near certain economic disruption from shortages of  water. They can choose smarter paths where they are prepared for droughts  and floods and avoid losses when they come.  They can opt to generate  net gains from moving, cleaning and reusing water throughout the city  instead of sending pollution through the drain.  Q: What role can the United Nations play in relieving the pressure  and meeting the threats of future water shortages among urban  populations worldwide?  A: It is important to note that the United Nations already does play  a crucial role in generating knowledge and mobilising resources that  helps cities across the world engage in smarter water management,  improve sustainable water and sanitation coverage in developing  areas, and build resilience to disaster. Organisations such as UN-Habitat, U. N.  Development Programme (UNDP),  U. N.  International Strategy for Disaster Reduction (UNISRD), U. N.   Environment Programme (UNEP), World Meteorological Organisation (WMO)  and the World Health Organisation (WHO) are among the most powerful  influences for local and national governments to prioritise and  improve their water governance and invest in measures to help them  prepare for natural disasters. As the scale of the challenge continues to accelerate, U. N.  bodies  will need to expand their efforts and ensure that they continue to  improve the coordination and collaboration between its organisations.  Q: What should national governments do to avoid an impending  disaster? Investments in infrastructure? Sound water management?  A: First, they must move from problem-solving to solution planning.   Problem-solving is waiting for water shortages to arise and moving  new water in to replace it. But moving water to solve shortages as many places do today will not  work for much longer it is like buying a larger a belt to confront  weight gain.  It is not a healthy solution, neither for cities or the  environment.  Certainly, we must invest much more in water than we do today.   Following current trends, demand for water could increase to as much  as 40 percent above global supply within two decades.  Almost all  actors who use water on a large scale can do so more efficiently, and  invest in technologies and processes to prevent water pollution. The Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD)  predicts that more money will need to be placed into new or improved  infrastructure than any other, including electricity, transport or  telecommunications. These investments will lead to long-term growth, nicer cities, and  green jobs.  The best choice for technology will differ depending on  local conditions but the return on investment in short, medium and  long term will be positive and need to be made today.  Perhaps the greatest priority to ensure sustainable growth is improve  our management of the water, energy and food.  There are tremendous  opportunities to increase the efficiency of water use for energy  generation, generate energy from water reuse and reduce that losses  and waste of food from the field on its way to the consumer. This would not only save tremendous amounts of water, it could also  improve our ability to feed growing populations and energise our  towns and cities.  