As one of the world's emerging economic powerhouses, Brazil is  vigourously pursuing one of the key economic objectives on the  U. N. 's development agenda: South-South Cooperation. The Brazilian Cooperation Agency is currently participating in scores  of economic projects, mostly in the agricultural sector, in over 80  developing countries in Asia, Africa and Latin America and the  Caribbean. The projects range from livestock and fisheries to horticulture and  food production. Brazil is supporting the development of an experimental cotton  station in Mali, a rice station in Senegal, a vocational training  centre and food security programme in East Timor and soybean  production in Cuba. Additionally, it is providing technical expertise and assistance in  the development of agricultural technology in Haiti, a vocational  training centre in Paraguay and the creation and consolidation of the  Institute of Agriculture and Livestock in Bolivia. In 2010 alone, Brazil signed 21 international agreements with just  one single regional organisation, the Caribbean Community (CARICOM),  along with bilateral agreements with Jamaica, Guyana, Suriname and  Haiti. The six Brazilian ministries involved in South-South cooperation  initiatives are the ministries of rural development; social  development and the fight against hunger; fishery and acquaculture;  environment; agriculture, livestock and supply; and external  relations. Brazil's role, however, has also taken added importance as one of  three partners, along with India and South Africa, in one of the most  vibrant coalition of developing nations: IBSAIn an interview with IPS, Ambassador Gilberto Moura, director of the  Department of Inter-Regional Mechanisms, said IBSA's identity is  strongly committed to promoting development not only within its  members, but also in the developing world as a whole. The IBSA Forum, he said, supports developing nations through the IBSA  Facility Fund for Alleviation of Poverty and Hunger. The fund was inaugurated by the three IBSA heads of state and  government during the U. N.  General Assembly sessions back in  September 2003. Moura said each of the IBSA countries donates one million dollars  annually to the Fund, and these resources are used to implement  cooperation projects for developing countries, especially least  developed countries (LDCs) and countries that are recovering from  conflicts. These initiatives, he pointed out, conform to some of the principles  of South-South Cooperation, including strengthening of national  capacities, participation of national stakeholders, as well as the  promotion of national ownership of enterprises and their  sustainability. U. N.  Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, a strong supporter of South-South  Cooperation, says developing countries that pool know-how, exchange  ideas and coordinate plans can attain much greater gains than they  ever would on their own. He says South-South Cooperation is a vital component of the world's  response to fight hunger and poverty worldwide. The administrator of the U. N.  Development Programme (UNDP), Helen  Clark, who signed an agreement last year reinforcing her agency's  activities in Brazil, points out that UNDP is 'committed to  facilitating South-South cooperation, and looks forward to working  more closely with Brazil in programme countries around the world'. The IBSA projects funded by the three countries include a sports  complex in Ramallah Palestine; a solid waste collection project in  Haiti; and the refurbishment of two geographically isolated local  health units in Cape Verde. Moura told IPS the Fund has concluded four projects (in Cape Verde,  Guinea-Bissau, Haiti and Palestine); runs four projects (Burundi,  Cape Verde, Cambodia and Guinea-Bissau); and has seven to be  initiated (two in Guinea-Bissau, one in Laos, two in Palestine, one  in Sierra Leone and one in Vietnam). Other projects are being analysed and will be approved in a timely  fashion, including those for Sudan, South Sudan and East-Timor, he  added. Asked about the specific areas covered under the IBSA umbrella, Moura  said that all activities within IBSA demand active engagement of the  three member countries. Currently, the informal and rotational Secretariat, which coordinates  meetings, is under the responsibility of South Africa, which will  host the next presidential summit in October, near Durban. Prior to the summit, Brazil will host an IBSA seminar on Information  Society in Rio de Janeiro from Sep.  1-2.  Civil society fora usually  meet in parallel to the summits. To date, seven civil society meetings have been held: the Women's  Forum, Editor's Forum, Academic Forum, Parliamentary Forum, Small  Business Forum, Chief Executive Officer's (CEO) Forum, and Local  Governance Forum. Asked about the specific areas of cooperation, Moura said these  fields are being developed through 16 existing Working Groups (WG). They cover different areas: revenue administration, public  administration, agriculture, tourism, human settlements, science and  technology, trade, culture, defence, social development, education,  energy, environment, health, information society and transport. The actions of these WGs enhance the exchange of experiences and the  development of common initiatives, Moura said. In the field of science and technology, IBSA has undertaken a  programme, titled IBSAOCEAN, involving scientists from all three  countries. 'They are also working on an IBSA Satellite,' he added. In trade, there has been steady collaboration with the Federal  Revenue Services to facilitate commercial exchanges through the  institution of a safe and secure trade lane for authorised economic  operators. Efforts to normalise trade rules are being undertaken under the  umbrella of the WG on Trade. In the field of health, he said, the IBSA delegations to the World  Health Organisation have been working jointly on a large spectrum of  resolutions. 