Biofuels are an alternative energy source that can drive local  development by generating jobs, know-how and technology.  But  they can also cause social damage, as locals fear in the case  of industrial-scale exploitation of babassu palm trees, which  grow abundantly in the wild in central and northern Brazil. Some 400,000 women and their families living on the eastern edge of  the Amazon jungle depend on the babassu palm (Orbignya phalerata) for  a livelihood.  The women are known as 'quebradeiras' (breakers)  because they collect and break the coconuts.  These subsistence-level households sell the coconut kernels, from  which the oil is extracted and used as vegetable oil and in the soap  and cosmetic industries, for cash.  They also use the starch-rich  fruit to produce a kind of flour, and the rest of the coconut is used  for animal feed and charcoal.  The traditional quebradeira communities also use the leaves of the  tall babassu palm tree for roof thatch, woven house walls, and  basket-making, while the trunks can be used as building materials. The Interstate Movement of Babassu Coconut Quebradeiras (MIQCB) has  warned of the threats to the members' livelihood from the pig iron  and ceramics industries, which use the coconut shells and husks to  make charcoal on a larger-scale, and pose unfair competition by  hiring poorly-paid coconut breakers, said MIQCB adviser Luciene  Figueiredo. These industries burn the entire coconut, she said, wasting the  kernels - of which there are three to five in each coconut - and the  nutritional potential of the fruit, while causing air pollution,  Figueiredo said. The government of the central state of Tocantins has banned the use  of babassu coconuts in industrial furnaces, but the other three  states where MIQCB members are active have not done so, she  complained. The burning of the kernels produces acrolein, a toxic fume.  For that  reason, the use of vegetable oil as motor fuel before it is turned  into biodiesel is prohibited, said Marcelo Rodrigues, a chemical  engineer at Tecbio, a biofuel technology company. Tecbio itself is posing a threat to the babassu subsistence economy.   The firm, based in Fortaleza, the capital of the northeast state of  Ceará, near the areas where the babassu palm tree grows wild, has  developed and is trying to sell a system of industrial processing  that would replace the quebradeiras. The coconut breakers do their work manually, breaking the hard- shelled coconut with an upturned axe blade and a wooden stick used as  a kind of hammer.  Several small machines have been invented to make  the work less dangerous, but none of them have been approved by the  quebradeiras themselves. Tecbio, founded by Brazilian biodiesel inventor Expedito Parente, has  designed a plant to produce ethanol from the babassu coconut.   According to the company's literature, it will produce 80 litres of  ethanol per ton of babassu coconut. The company has also developed a machine to produce compact  briquettes from the coconut shell, whose density increases the  heating capacity, Rodrigues said, adding that 'a large company' has  expressed an interest in the charcoal substitute. The babassu coconut kernels can also be used to produce biodiesel and  bio-kerosene as aviation fuel that has the advantage of functioning  well at low oxygen levels, he explained while attending the All About  Energy 2011 fair on renewable energy sources held in July in  Fortaleza. The quebradeiras have been recognised as one of the 'traditional  populations' that enjoy protection under Brazil's environmental laws.   These groups also include the 'seringueiros' - Amazon jungle rubber- tappers - and small-scale fishing communities.  The Brazilian government guarantees the coconut breakers a minimum  price for their kernels. The quebradeiras have been organised in the MIQCB, which includes  associations, cooperatives and working groups, for 16 years.  Most of  the women harvest and break coconuts, but several hundred work in 26  plants that produce vegetable oil and soap. The movement is fighting for the conservation of threatened groves of  babassu palm.  The country's vast fields of soy have reached the  southern part of the state of Maranhão in northern Brazil, and are  still expanding.  There are also growing plantations of eucalyptus,  used to produce charcoal and paper pulp, which are crowding out  native forests. Under Maranhão state law, it is illegal to cut down babassu palm  trees.  But the legislation contains so many loopholes that it has  ended up fuelling rather than curbing deforestation, according to  environmentalists. Another ongoing struggle waged by the quebradeiras is regaining free  access to groves of babassu palm trees on private land, and  preserving access to trees on public land. The women plied their trade freely in Maranhão until 1969, when  approval of a law formalising rural land ownership fomented the  occupation - legal or illegal - and fencing off of land by private  owners. Since then, the MIQCB has successfully pushed for passage of several  municipal laws that have guaranteed the quebradeiras access to  babassu palm trees on both public and privately-owned land.  But some  states have only granted the women legal access to trees on public  land, leaving authorisation to harvest coconuts from babassu groves  on private land up to the owner. The MIQCB's goal is a national law guaranteeing free access to the  trees.  A bill to that effect was introduced in the lower house of  Congress in 2007, but it is not expected to be voted on any time  soon. However, the bioenergy boom could change things, with new and  powerful actors fighting over babassu palm trees. Demand for energy biomass is growing fast, said Laercio Couto, a  retired professor from a state university who now works as a  consultant for large companies. Europe and Japan are signing long-term contracts for importing  millions of tons of biomass in pellets, to replace fossil fuels, he  said. One large Brazilian pulp company, for example, is planting eucalyptus  trees in Maranhão to meet the demand, making use of its experience in  the monoculture tree plantations to expand its business into the  field of energy, Couto noted. The retired professor has developed a technology for the intensive  planting of eucalyptus, to cater to the needs of the growing  bioenergy market. In response to the demand for biomass, a sugar cane genetic  improvement company in  São Paulo is now trying to develop varieties that produce more fibre  and less sucrose - running counter to past research. It is difficult to escape the bioenergy fever.  Babassu palm trees grow on 185,000 square km of land in four  Brazilian states, an area equivalent to half of the territory of  Japan.  The trees are most heavily concentrated in the south of  Maranhão, in the transition zone between Brazil's semiarid northeast  and the Amazon rainforest. They proliferate and become dominant in deforested areas, because  they grow faster in shade-free places.  Thus, harvesting the babassu  coconuts is more similar to farming than other activities involving  more widely dispersed wild-growing trees or vegetation, such as  rubber-tapping in the Amazon jungle. The challenge is to incorporate the quebradeiras into larger-scale  mechanised harvesting systems, enabling them to benefit from a leap  in productivity and profits as the bioenergy industry grows. 