People do not normally leave their homes, their families, and their communities  unless they have no other option.  Yet as environmental stresses mount, we can  expect to see a growing number of environmental refugees.  Rising seas and  increasingly devastating storms grab headlines, but expanding deserts, falling  water tables, and toxic waste and radiation are also forcing people from their  homes. Advancing deserts are now on the move almost everywhere.  The Sahara desert, for example, is  expanding in every direction.  As it advances northward, it is squeezing the populations of Morocco,  Tunisia, and Algeria against the Mediterranean coast. The Sahelian region of Africa - the vast swath of savannah that separates the southern Sahara desert  from the tropical rainforests of central Africa - is shrinking as the desert moves southward.  As the  desert invades Nigeria, Africa's most populous country, from the north, farmers and herders are forced  southward, squeezed into a shrinking area of productive land. A 2006 U. N.  conference on desertification in Tunisia projected that by 2020 up to 60 million people  could migrate from sub-Saharan Africa to North Africa and Europe. In Iran, villages abandoned because of spreading deserts or a lack of water number in the thousands.  In  Brazil, some 250,000 square miles of land are affected by desertification, much of it concentrated in  the country's northeast. In Mexico, many of the migrants who leave rural communities in arid and semiarid regions of the  country each year are doing so because of desertification.  Some of these environmental refugees end up  in Mexican cities, others cross the northern border into the United States.  U. S.  analysts estimate that  Mexico is forced to abandon 400 square miles of farmland to desertification each year. In China, desert expansion has accelerated in each successive decade since 1950.  Desert scholar Wang  Tao reports that over the last half-century or so some 24,000 villages in northern and western China  have been abandoned either entirely or partly because of desert expansion. China is heading for a ‘Dust Bowl’ like the one that forced more than 2 million 'Okies' to leave their  land in the U. S.  in the 1930s.  But the dust bowl forming in China is much larger and so is the  population: China’s migration may measure in the tens of millions.  And as a U. S.  embassy report  entitled ‘Grapes of Wrath in Inner Mongolia’ noted, 'unfortunately, China's twenty-first century ‘Okies’  have no California to escape to - at least not in China. 'With the vast majority of the 2. 3 billion people projected to be added to the world by 2050 being born  in countries where water tables are falling, water refugees are likely to become commonplace.  They will  be most common in arid and semiarid regions where populations are outgrowing the water supply and  sinking into hydrological poverty. Villages in northwestern India are being abandoned as aquifers are depleted and people can no longer  find water.  Millions of villagers in northern and western China and in northern Mexico may have to move  because of a lack of water. Thus far the evacuations resulting from water shortages have been confined to villages, but eventually  whole cities might have to be relocated, such as Sana’a, the capital of Yemen, and Quetta, the capital of  Pakistan’s Baluchistan province. Sana’a, a fast-growing city of more than 2 million people, is literally running out of water.  Quetta,  originally designed for 50,000 people, now has a population exceeding 1 million - all of whom depend  on 2,000 wells pumping water from what is believed to be a fossil aquifer.  In the words of one study  assessing its water prospect, Quetta will soon be 'a dead city'. Two other semiarid Middle Eastern countries that are suffering from water shortages are Syria and Iraq.   Both are beginning to reap the consequences of over-pumping their aquifers - namely irrigation wells  going dry.  In Syria, these trends have forced the abandonment of 160 villages.  And a U. N.  report  estimates that more than 100,000 people in northern Iraq have been uprooted because of water  shortages. A final category of environmental refugee has appeared only in the last 50 years or so: people who are  trying to escape toxic waste or dangerous radiation levels. During the late 1970s, Love Canal - a small town in upstate New York, part of which was built on top of  a toxic waste disposal site - made national and international headlines.  Beginning in August 1978,  families were relocated at government expense and reimbursed for their homes at market prices.  By  October 1980, a total of 950 families had been permanently relocated.  A few years later, the federal  government arranged for the permanent evacuation and relocation of all 2,000 residents of Times  Beach, Missouri, after the U. S.  Environmental Protection Agency discovered dioxin levels well above the  public health standards. While the U. S.  has relocated two communities because of health-damaging pollutants, the identification  of more than 450 'cancer villages' in China suggests the need to evacuate hundreds of communities.   China’s Ministry of Health statistics show that cancer is now the country’s leading cause of death, and  with little pollution control, whole communities near chemical factories are suffering from  unprecedented rates of cancer.  Young people are leaving for the city in droves, for jobs and possibly for  better health.  Yet many others are too sick or too poor to leave. Another infamous source of environmental refugees is the Chernobyl nuclear power plant in Kiev, which  exploded in April 1986.  This started a powerful fire that lasted for 10 days.  Massive amounts of  radioactive material were spewed into the atmosphere, showering communities in the region with heavy  doses of radiation.  As a result, the residents of the nearby town of Pripyat and several other  communities in Ukraine, Belarus, and Russia were evacuated - requiring the resettlement of 350,400  people. In 1992, six years after the accident, Belarus was devoting 20 percent of its national budget to  resettlement and the many other costs associated with the accident. When a devastating earthquake and tsunami hit Japan in March 2011, the ensuing nuclear crisis at the  badly damaged Fukushima Daiichi power plant forced tens of thousands of people from their homes.   Whether they will be able to return or will become permanently displaced is a question that remains  unanswered. Separating out the geneses of today’s refugees is not always easy.  Often the environmental and  economic stresses that drive migration are closely intertwined.  But whatever the reason for leaving  home, people are taking increasingly desperate measures.  Some of their stories are heartrending  beyond belief. As a general matter, environmental refugees are migrating from poor countries to rich ones, from  Africa, Asia, and Latin America to North America and Europe.  Some of the largest flows will be across  national borders and they are likely to be illegal.  The potentially massive movement of people across  national boundaries is already affecting some countries.  The U. S.  is erecting a fence along the border  with Mexico.  The Mediterranean Sea is now routinely patrolled by naval vessels trying to intercept the  small boats of African migrants bound for Europe.  India, with a steady stream of migrants from  Bangladesh and the prospect of millions more to come, is building a 10-foot-high fence along their  shared border. Maybe it is time for governments to consider whether it might not be cheaper and far less painful in  human terms to treat the causes of migration rather than merely respond to it.  This means working with  developing countries to restore their economy’s natural support systems - the soils, the water tables,  the grasslands, the forests - and it means accelerating the shift to smaller families to help people break  out of poverty. Treating symptoms instead of causes is not good medicine.  Nor is it good public policy. *Lester R.  Brown is founder and president of the Earth Policy Institute.  This article highlights  data presented in Lester R.  Brown, ‘World on the Edge: How to Prevent Environmental and Economic  Collapse’ (New York: W. W.  Norton & Company, 2011), available online at www. earth- policy. org/books/wote