As the United Nations readies for a major international conference on  sustainable development next June in Brazil, non-governmental organisations  (NGOs) are preparing to play a key role in the run-up to the summit meeting and  are preparing a plan of action to be adopted by world leaders. The Rio+20 conference will take place 20 years after the historic Earth Summit in Brazil in June 1992. Asked about the importance of NGO contributions, Michael G.  Renner, senior researcher at the  Worldwatch Institute told IPS: 'I think the answer is still outstanding.  It will depend on how successful  NGOs are in ensuring that the conference has adequate visibility in the public eye. '  He said NGOs need to make sure that the conference is not seen as disconnected from people’s daily  concerns. A series of NGO meetings are scheduled to take place in the coming months, including one sponsored  by the U. N. ’s Department of Public Information in Bonn, Germany, Sep.  3-5. In an interview with IPS, Renner said that mainstream media often either ignore U. N.  conferences or  portray them as only of interest to U. N.  'bureaucrats' and policy wonks. So, NGOs need to be an effective bridge: translate specialist lingo into language that is meaningful to  people in communities around the world, and at the same time carry grassroots concerns into the  conference. They also need to ensure that the conference is not an isolated event.  The time before and after the  conference is as important as the conference itself. Excerpts from the interview follow:Q: Why is it important to have another Conference on Sustainable Development?A: The Rio 2012 conference presents an opportunity to take stock of both the progress that has been  made and the goals that remain unmet.  It offers a unique political opening to review and refresh  commitments and promote new modes of international cooperation to address some of the most  pressing issues of the century. By and large, the environmental trends since 1992 have not been encouraging, and so we need fresh  commitments, and a reassessment of which policies work and which don’t. Clearly, this is not just a 'technical' assessment, but in large part a deeply political exercise.  Since the  first Rio conference, we have heard much rhetoric about relying on market tools and mechanisms.  But if  governments don’t provide an overall framework, then they are simply abdicating their responsibilities.   And if the public cannot hold governments and corporations accountable, then commitments may never  properly be translated into action. The conference is simply a means to an end, training the spotlight on where we have succeeded and  where we have failed.  I don’t so much look to the speeches that will be given or official communiqués  that will be released.  What’s more important is to create a renewed sense of forward momentum, to  forge new partnerships and alliances, and to empower those who all too often are relegated to  sidelines. Q: What do you think are the new and emerging challenges the world is facing regarding the  environment?A: I think less in terms of new challenges than about the need to think in more interdisciplinary ways.   We are by now quite aware of the various strands of the environmental challenge, such as climate  change, declining biodiversity, growing water scarcity, and so on.  We need to get better at  understanding how these strands are interwoven and that we may be in for growing surprises.   Environmental change is not linear, but full of unexpected discontinuities and feedback loops. An important aspect of the Rio 2012 conference is environmental governance.  Mention this, and many  people will think it means creating an arcane bureaucratic structure.  But what is really required is that  we challenge our compartmentalised world. We can’t properly address environmental challenges if we assume that it’s a job for the environment  ministries of the world alone.  The causes and the impacts are multi-faceted, and policies at other  ministries - economics, finance, science and technology, labour, foreign affairs, to name just a few -  must evolve accordingly. We have to figure out ways to overcome the walls that separate the different turfs, not to mention the  borders that separate us into competing nation states.  Clearly, a single conference is not going to  accomplish this, but the discussions in Rio can help connect the dots. Q: The U. N.  Conference on Sustainable Development will take place in June 2012, 20 years after the  original Earth Summit in Rio de Janeiro.  This time the focus will be put on building a green economy  and sustainable development governance.  What are the main advances in these areas since 1992?A: An important advance is that concepts like ‘Green Economy’ or ‘Green Jobs’ have entered the lexicon  as accepted terms.  For too many years, the discussion focused on whether the pursuit of environmental  goals would be detrimental to the economy and to employment.  But it has become clear that  environmental protection and economic wellbeing do not have to be mutually exclusive goals. In fact, economic wellbeing will increasingly depend on pursuing technologies that reduce humanity’s  overall footprint, and a transition of economic and social structures toward greater sustainability. That’s not to say the discussion is over, far from it.  In some countries, such as the United States, the  public discourse has suffered reversals.  There is also the question of what is meant by green economy.   As with other terms, such as sustainable development, there is a certain danger that it will come to  mean highly different things to different people. ‘Green growth’ is now often seen as the goal, sidestepping the question whether continued expansion  of the physical economy can go on unchecked, or whether there is a need to more fundamentally  rethink how the economy functions.  Greater efficiency in the use of energy and materials are important,  but these gains might be cancelled out through higher levels of consumption. Q: What comes after the Rio+20 Conference? What’s next?A: As always, there is the challenge of making good on the speeches and declarations - to ensure that a  conference like this is not just a one-time event with no meaningful follow-up.  So, the work must  continue.  And in some ways, what happens in the corridors between conference sessions - making new  connections, building new alliances - may well be even more important than what happens during the  sessions.  I regard the conference as an opportunity to create momentum, but the momentum then  needs to be sustained. 