For the majority of the world’s population, citizenship is a fact of life, something  so fundamental that the idea of not being citizen to any state seems  unfathomable.  Yet for 12 million people worldwide, ordinary life as most people  expect it is impossible because they belong to no country and are thus deprived  of basic rights. The United Nations Refugee Agency (UNHCR) launched a campaign last week to raise awareness about  the issue of statelessness, and to rally states to increase their efforts to address the struggles faced by  stateless inhabitants - not citizens - of their countries. Stateless communities and individuals 'are in desperate need of help because they live in a nightmarish  legal limbo,' said António Guterres, the U. N.  High Commissioner for Refugees. Without legal status, these people are rendered relatively helpless to ameliorate their situations.  In some  countries, legislation is what prevents them from obtaining citizenship, yet they cannot vote and are not  constituents of any legal representative.  As a result, their voices often go unheard and their plight  unnoticed. In addition to these legal challenges, being stateless prevents people from accessing basic rights and  leading normal lives.  Without citizenship, receiving an education, finding employment, getting married,  opening a bank account, or accessing health care become difficult if not impossible. In 1954, states held the first convention relating to statelessness and managed to define who is  considered stateless.  In 1961, they held the Convention on the Reduction of Statelessness, agreeing on  principles and a legal framework to help states reduce statelessness in their own laws.  To date, only 66  states have signed the 1954 convention and 38 are party to the 1961 convention. UNHCR estimates 12 million people are stateless in the world, but acknowledges that the very  definition of statelessness complicates the gathering of accurate information, and some estimate that  the number may be as many as 15 million globally. Slipping Through the CracksAn individual can lose his or her citizenship in several different ways.  One of the most common  instances is after a state ceases to exist, such as after the breakup of the Soviet Union and several of its  republics in the 1990s.  Other causes include racial or ethnic discrimination, discrimination against  women, or simple negligence to register a child at birth. Depending on the state, the legal pathway to becoming a citizen may be extremely expensive or  complicated, or may not exist at all. Russians living in Kazakhstan after the collapse of the Soviet Union, for instance, were not eligible to  apply for Kazakh citizenship after their Soviet Union citizenships became defunct.  But unless they had  lived in Russia for a certain period of time, they could not apply for Russian nationality either. 'These are problems that are solvable through administrative or legislative action,' Vincent Cochetel, a  senior UNHCR staff member who was kidnapped near Chechnya in 1998, told IPS.  Though in some  countries, especially ones with racially or ethnically discriminatory practices and laws, laws  'systematically create more obstacles for one part of the population to get access to citizenship. 'Few states have established laws that address such situations to override discrimination and grant  stateless people citizenship.  The issue is 'totally overlooked by many countries,' Cochetel said, while  other countries possess a 'culture of denial' and seek to shift responsibility for stateless people within  their borders onto other countries.  In general, he said the issue possesses 'not much traction' in the  international community. The commonly held belief that statelessness is a phenomenon of the past also impedes legal progress.   What UNHCR hopes to do is convince states of the issue’s urgency so that they 'put in place practical  measures to assist people to be documented and to get a right to nationality,' Cochetel explained, and  work with states to eliminate barriers that lead to or create statelessness. Being stateless has dire consequences for such individuals, because 'without nationality there is no  access to anything,' Cochetel explained.  Many of these individuals are part of marginalised communities  with no government or embassy to turn to for protection.  With limited education or employment  opportunities, their very livelihoods are threatened. A Global IssueStatelessness is a problem existing in many parts of the world, though UNHCR highlighted Southeast  Asia, Central Asia, Eastern Europe, the Middle East, and some African countries as places where it was  'particularly acute'. Others, including Morocco, Algeria, Egypt, states from the former Yugoslavia, Kyrgyzstan and Kenya,  were considered 'works in progress' for amending legislation, though they have yet to fully implement  it. Some countries have successfully implemented laws granting citizenship to certain communities and  minority groups.  Bangladesh, Brazil, Iraq, Vietnam, and Indonesia all recently amended or passed  constitutions or laws to make them more inclusive of those previously without citizenship due to  gender, ethnicity, birth location, or time spent abroad. UNHCR’s campaign will continue for several months and U. N.  headquarters in New York is currently  hosting an exhibit called 'Nowhere People' featuring photographs and information on the world’s  stateless. 