On the tenth day of a protest wave that has been gaining  momentum since Aug.  20 and will continue until Sep.  3, nearly  300 people gathered in Lafayette Park directly across from the  White House in Washington D. C. , chanting, 'When I say 'tar  sands', you say 'no!' When I say 'action', you say 'go!''The protest - a sustained effort against the building of a new oil  pipeline connecting the tar sands of Canada's southwestern province  to several refineries around the Gulf of Mexico — is the most recent  chapter in a civil disobedience campaign that has so far led to  almost 400 arrests, making it the biggest environment-related action  in the U. S.  in a generation. The proposed 2,753-kilometre, seven-billion-dollar pipeline, called  Keystone XL, will carry 700,000 to 800,000 barrels of oil a day and  supposedly bring an end to the U. S. 's dependence on hostile oil  providers like Venezuela. However, the project has raised the ire of an increasingly vocal  green movement that views the pipeline — the largest outside of  Russia or China — as a powerful catalyst for action against President  Barack Obama, who has thus far failed to make good on campaign  promises to his green voter base to lower carbon emissions and  reverse the fuel-hungry trends of previous administrations. Appearing on TV fresh from a two-day stint in D. C. 's Central Cell  Block prison, Bill McKibben, author and founder of the environmental  organisation 350. org, said Monday, 'For once, the president has the  opportunity to do the right thing without having to involve Congress.   Since the pipeline crosses national boundaries, it requires a  presidential finding to prove that the project is in our best  national interests. 'This will be the purest test of Obama's promise that 'With my  presidency the rise of oceans will begin to slow and the planet will  begin to heal',' McKibben added. He quoted James Hansen, a NASA climatologist who said earlier this  month that approval of the pipeline would be 'game over' for planet  earth. On Aug.  3, Hansen, along with 20 other leading U. S.  climate  scientists, penned a letter to the president that read, 'It's  imperative that we move quickly to alternate forms of energy and  leave the tar sands in the ground — as scientists we can say  categorically that [the Keystone XL pipeline] is not only not in the  national interest, it's also not in the planet's best interest. 'The tar sands in Alberta's oil-rich wilderness are home to the  world's most carbon-laden crude, and environmentalists in both the  U. S.  and Canada have long warned that the grimy process of extracting  and refining it would cause unprecedented and irreversible levels of  greenhouse gas emissions. As far back as 2008, climatologists noted that producing one barrel  of oil from oil sands is 'a water- and energy-intensive process that  emits three times more greenhouse gases than production of  conventional light or medium crude oil. 'Recent climate research shows that the tar sands form of crude oil,  also called bitumen, could release an estimated 150 million tonnes of  carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions every year — more than the collective  annual emissions of 85 percent of the world's countries. In addition, scientists say that transporting the oil southwards  through the U. S.  heartland towards refineries in Oklahoma and Texas  would wreak havoc on bird habitats, devastate the environment along  the pipeline's prospective route, threaten the supply of freshwater  in the Ogallala aquifer as the pipe crosses the Great Plains, and  severely jeopardise the safety and autonomy of tribal lands lying  between Alberta and Texas. According to previous reports by IPS environmental journalist Stephen  Leahy, the proposed pipeline could also be used to pump water from  the Ogallala aquifer — one of the world's largest - to the badly  parched states in the arid southwest, causing pipeline industry  officials to warn that Keystone can be easily used to transport water  from a source that is already being overdrawn. Environmentalists are also fearful of spills, given that 'Keystone 1,  a smaller pipeline owned by TransCanada, the same 40-billion-dollar  company that wants to build Keystone XL, has recorded 12 spills in  its first year of operation — the latest in May 2010 in North Dakota,  involving some 80,000 litres of tar sands crude,' Leahy reported. Though the project has yet to clear several bureaucratic hurdles  before construction begins, the State Department all but green- lighted the operation on Friday afternoon when Kerri-Ann Jones,  assistant secretary of the bureau of oceans and international  environmental and scientific affairs, told the press via  teleconference that 'there would be no serious impacts to resources  along the pipe's corridor'. While admitting that several Indigenous cultural resources and plant  and wildlife habitats could be 'adversely affected', Jones reassured  the public that the Environmental Impact Statement (EIS) for the  Keystone XL project outlined measures to overcome any potential harm  to the environment. However, neither the scientists nor the protesters have been assuaged  by these assertions, choosing instead to take their cues from visible  ecological crises and to use their bodies as a new kind of currency  against the financial might of oil companies like TransCanada, Royal  Dutch Shell and Exxon Mobil, which have all been lobbying hard to  preserve their investments in oil sands production. In between rallying the crowds and chanting slogans outside the White  House today, Reverend Paul Mayer, co founder of the Climate Crisis  Coalition, told IPS, 'I'm here because climate change is one of the  greatest moral, political cultural and spiritual issues facing this  planet now for both humans and non-humans, and drilling the tar sands  is going to bring disaster much closer… The rising seas, the  unbearable temperatures, drought, hunger, displacement by the  millions of the poor and powerless — all of those things come closer  to us with talk of this pipeline. ''I worked with Dr.  [Martin Luther] King during the Civil Rights  Movement,' Mayer added.  'He taught me that sometimes you have to  break the law in order to preserve a higher one and today we are  risking arrest in order to send a very clear message to our president  that he cannot take his reelection for granted and count on the  support of people like ourselves unless he keeps the promises he made  on the night of his election. '