The United States' biggest environmental groups put aside  their differences last week to make an urgent intervention on  the country's addiction to oil.  The first step on the long  road to recovery, they say, is to stop the proposed  construction of the Keystone XL pipeline that will 'mainline'  the world's dirtiest oil from northern Canada into the U. S.   heartland. 'This (Keystone) is a terrible project,' they wrote in a letter to  President Barack Obama, citing dangers to the climate, the risks of  disastrous spills and leaks, and the economic damage that will come  from continued dependence on fossil fuel. Oil from the Keystone XL will dump an estimated 150 million tonnes of  carbon dioxide (CO2) annually into the atmosphere - more than most  countries.  Scientists warn that approval of the project will further  fuel the extreme weather that has already resulted in over one  billion dollars in damages recorded this year in nine separate  extreme weather events in the U. S. And that doesn't include the estimated 20 to 45 billion dollars in  costs from Hurricane Irene last weekend, mainly due to extensive  flooding. Carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions from fossil fuels do not cause  hurricanes, tornados or droughts, but they do trap additional heat  and water vapour that fuels those events, climate scientists have  proven time and time again. Asked about the impacts of adding another 150 million tonnes of CO2  into the atmosphere, German climate scientist Malte Meinshausen, a  researcher at the Potsdam Institute for Climate Impact Research, told  IPS that it will warm the planet for hundreds of years and lead to  higher sea levels and 'more pronounced droughts and floods'. The green groups asked the president to be strong and take the first  step by denying permission to build the 2,400-kilometre, seven- billion-dollar pipeline, which would pump 700,000 to 800,000 barrels  a day of bitumen oil from Canada's tar sands in northern Alberta. Thousands of people have brought the same message to President  Obama's front door at the White House in the past 10 days.  More than  500 have been arrested for protesting on the White House sidewalk,  urging him to take the first step in breaking the country's addiction  to fossil fuels by standing up to the Big Oil lobby. This is an unusual circumstance, where the president gets to make the  'go, no go' decision all by himself.  No need to deal with a  dysfunctional Congress.  And environmentalists argue that for a  president whose popularity has plummeted, it would seem to be a  public relations coup to take a stand and finally act on his promises  to fight climate change. No easy decisionThe problem for President Obama is that some of the world's most  powerful oil companies have a problem.  Big Oil has made enormous  investments in Canada's tar sands, the second largest oil reserves on  the planet.  They need to ship their 'product' - and lots of it - to  the lucrative U. S.  market for processing, and very likely export it  to Europe or even China. TransCanada Pipelines is eager to build the Keystone XL to transport  its 'product' across the border.  The company will charge hundreds of  millions a year for the service, but it's worth it because Big Oil  will use the pipeline to make an estimated 40 to 60 billion dollars a  year, or maybe more, depending on how high they can jack up the  street price of gasoline. Big Oil has worked hard to ensure the full cooperation and assistance  of the government of Canada and the province of Alberta, where the  tar sands are located.  For a piece of the action, the governments of  Canada and Alberta have been slow or failed to enforce their own  environmental laws.  Canada has completely ignored its international obligations to reduce  fossil fuel use.  Both governments have used public funds to furiously  lobby their counterparts in the U. S.  to follow suit. It was hardly surprising then to see a letter by Canada's ambassador  to the U. S. , Gary Doer, published Monday in the New York Times using  arguments promoting the Keystone project that appear to be lifted  from TransCanada's press releases. The U. S.  and Canada clearly have an oil addiction, but green groups  argue that it is oil money that keeps them addicted - and keeps them  from getting into rehab. During the last election cycle, the oil industry gave members of the  U. S.  Congress more than 13. 6 million dollars, reports Steve Kretzman  of Oil Change International, an NGO that researches the links between  oil, gas, coal corporations and governments. These pay-offs are excellent investments.  Top U. S.  oil companies  reported 73 billion dollars in profits in just the first six months  of this year.  Part of those profits is thanks to at least four  billion dollars in annual subsidies from U. S.  taxpayers, noted  Kretzman in a recent report. Despite the U. S. 's ballooning debt crisis, Big Oil will continue to  receive this public money in what is by far the country's biggest  welfare fraud.  Eight of the 12 members of the newly-named Joint  Committee on Deficit Reduction charged with tackling the debt crisis  have voted in the last two years to allow oil companies to keep  pocketing billions in taxpayer subsidies, Kretzman found.  Remarkably, Canada's corporate welfare for Big Oil is far higher at  2. 84 billion dollars in 2008 according to  International Institute  for Sustainable Development (IISD) based in Winnipeg, Canada.  Last  month one of the world's richest corporations, Shell Oil agreed to  accept a 'gift' of 865 million in Canadian taxpayer's dollars to  cover most of the cost of building an experimental carbon capture and  storage (CCS) facility to cut its CO2 pollution in the tar sands. Study after study show that public subsidies for alternative energy -  not including corn ethanol - which would actually wean the U. S.  and  Canada of their oil addiction are a small fraction of what the oil  industry get.  Which begs the question: If the U. S.  and Canada are  really trying to kick their oil addiction, why do they keep giving  their dealers bonuses?Unless the river of money flowing into Big Oil's coffers from  subsidies and the biggest corporate profits in history are diverted,  scientists and activists say there is no hope of dealing with climate  change, the biggest crisis humanity has ever faced. 