He started with four rabbits and a will to succeed.  Seven years later, Samuel Agossou has built a home for his family and employs a dozen other young people in his business. He says that with more support from governments, more youth in Africa's rural areas could follow his example.  'Policy in African countries must work towards strengthening the capacity of young people to create their own jobs, particularly in rural areas where there aren't really schools or enterprises,' he said. Agossou was one of the stars of the Global Youth Innovation Workshop-Fair, which took place in Benin's economic capital, Cotonou, from Oct.  10-13.  The fair, organised jointly by the International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD) and the Benin government, brought together young people from around the world to highlight enterprises in rural areas created and managed by youth.  The event also marked the launch of a youth-run network to inspire and support such projects.  Speaking to IPS from his exhibition stand, where he was showing off the products of the rabbit-rearing business, which he started in 2002, Agossou said he began with three doe rabbits and one male.  'Today I have 700,000 rabbits.  My profits have allowed me to buy a house for my family and to raise money to meet their various needs. 'Benin's Minister for National Defence Issifou Kogui N’Douro, who presided over the official opening of the fair, said: 'Finance is actually the biggest challenge to the implementation of the action plan developed in Malabo, the capital of Equatorial Guinea.  The African Union adopted a plan for the period from 2009 to 2018, aimed at reducing unemployment amongst the African youth. 'Government aidRatoejanahary Mirado, president of the Association Vonona, which assists rural communities in their efforts to achieve durable development in Madagascar, said regional governments should take note of global actions to really have an effect on young farmers. 'The innovation and creativity that we bring to development does not particularly need an international plan.  Our actions must be supported by our individual governments … through direct and indirect aid from the budget,' said Mirado.  She explained she worked for a year in her aunt’s raffia (a natural palm fibre) manufacturing workshop until she was able to save enough money to start her own business.  'Six years after I left my aunt's place, my raffia products are sold throughout the world and I hold an investment of 3,300 dollars in a youth organisation that I lead and in which I employ 10 other young people like me. 'Bright futureCharles Feridjini, the president of Benin’s Youth Delegation to the exhibition, said the youth should take a prominent place in any government policy.  'It is possible to overcome the poverty if our governments actually use the knowledge, expertise and the power the youth has; especially in rural areas. 'Mohamed Bourga, a young Syrian fashion entrepreneur, said his business meant that dozens of newlyweds no longer had to make the trip from his village to the capital, Damascus, in order to buy clothes.  Bourga dreams of selling his clothing in Syria’s major cities 'and possibly importing wedding dresses. 'Agossou said in the right conditions, created by government and the youth, more jobs and better produce are sure to follow in Africa. 