Peter Sutherland, chairman of British Petroleum, never realised his goal of  becoming president of the European Commission.  Back in 1994, Britain  recommended him for that post – at a time he was director-general of the  World Trade Organisation - yet he failed to secure the crucial backing of the  government in his native Ireland. Despite having his ambitions thwarted, Sutherland continues to wield a  significant level of influence over the Commission, the European Union  executive.  Since 2007 he has been an official adviser on energy and climate  change to the present Commission chief José Manuel Barroso. Sutherland, himself a former EU commissioner who has filled some of the  most powerful vacancies in international commerce and politics, has claimed  that he counsels Barroso in a personal capacity, not as BP chairman.  But  environmentalists point out that his top ranking in BP means that he could  have divided loyalties between the interests of the public and that of a vast  private company.  This has been most evident recently with the development of an emissions  trading system (ETS), purportedly designed to regulate the amount of carbon  dioxide released by industry into the atmosphere.  The most contentious aspect of this scheme - which began operating in  2005 - relates to which industrial sectors should have to pay for permits to  pollute.  After it emerged that power companies were reaping windfall permits  by selling unused permits that they had been given free of charge – four  major utilities in Germany were reported to have raked in 8 billion euros  (12. 5 billion dollars) between them within a year of the ETS launch - the Commission proposed a series of modifications to the scheme in January  2008.  While drafts of the proposal advocated that oil refineries should have  to buy their permits through auctioning, this was removed from the final  version.  BP belongs to an alliance of energy giants known as the European Petroleum  Industry Association (EUROPIA).  This group has lobbied vigorously to ensure  that all permits to refineries are awarded free of charge, contending that  making them pay for the permits would damage the industry's  competitiveness.   While much of the lobbying has been behind closed doors,  EUROPIA admitted in 2008 that it provided 'significant input' into the debate  on how emissions trading should work in practice.  'There is certainly a potential conflict of interests here,' said Benjamin Diss  from Platform, an environmental campaign group in London.  'BP might be  trumpeting its efforts to promote solar energy but it is essentially still an oil  and gas company.  If Sutherland is advising the EU, that's obviously because  he has a lot of useful knowledge.  But it's knowledge that is skewed towards  that type of energy supply. 'Sutherland, who declined to comment when contacted, appears eager to  assert his green credentials.  He has been asked by the Danish Prime Minister  Anders Fogh Rasmussen to address how business can assist the fight against  climate change at a conference in Copenhagen that will take place soon after  he steps down as BP chairman later this year.  The conference is designed to  serve as a curtain-raiser for UN-sponsored talks aimed at fashioning a  successor to the Kyoto protocol, the key international accord on regulating  greenhouse gas emissions.  The talks are scheduled to conclude in December,  also in Copenhagen.  The public image of ecological responsibility that Sutherland is seeking to  construct appears at odds with the nature of his activities - and those of his  business colleagues - in Brussels. BP employs about 20 staff in an office located a short stroll from the  headquarters of the main EU institutions.  According to details entered into a  register of lobbyists set up by the European Commission, it spent less than  250,000 euros (334,000 dollars) last year on trying to influence EU laws.  Corporate Europe Observatory (CEO), an organisation which monitors  lobbying in Brussels, regards this sum as deceptively low.  It points out that  BP spent nearly 8 million dollars on lobbying in the U. S.  last year.  The reason  for the huge discrepancy between its stated expenditure in Brussels and that  in Washington could be that the U. S.  has stringent rules covering the  activities of lobbyists.  By contrast, the EU has taken a voluntary approach,  with the result that there is no obligation on companies to reveal the size of  their public relations war-chests.  CEO spokesman Olivier Hoedeman says that the absence of mandatory rules  has allowed Sutherland and other BP representatives to mask the true extent  of their links with EU officials.  'Of course, we cannot know if Sutherland  personally lobbied (on the emissions trading system),' he said.  'But this was  part of BP's lobbying offensive.  We see the limits to the transparency on  lobbying with the kind of information that BP registered.  They don't have to  mention which legislation or dossiers they lobbied on.  They are able to cover  their tracks and keep us guessing. 'Sanjeev Kumar, a specialist on the ETS with the World Wide Fund for Nature,  concurs.  'Any advice that he (Sutherland) gave should be documented and  should be accessible to all,' Kumar said.  'There needs to be a code of ethics.   Nobody has really defined effectively the role of advisers (to the European  Commission).  It is very vague. 'Also a leading figure in the investment bank Goldman Sachs and until  recently a board member of the Royal Bank of Scotland, Sutherland's lengthy  curriculum vitae includes stints as director-general of the World Trade  Organisation and as Ireland's attorney general.   