Iceland's Social Democratic Alliance and the Left-Green Party won the majority  of the seats in the Apr.  25 election, and will continue to work together for the  next four years as the ruling coalition. The two parties had formed a minority government Feb.  1 after the collapse  of the previous SDA and conservative Independence Party (IP) coalition.  The  LGP now have 14 members in the 63-member parliament and the SDP 20.  This is the first time that Iceland has a left-wing government, and the first  time in 18 years that the IP has not become part of the ruling coalition.  The IP suffered its worst defeat.  'The decline in popularity appeared straight  after the collapse of the banks in opinion polls taken at the time,' Gunnar  Helgi Kristinsson, professor of politics at the University of Iceland told IPS.   'The explanation is primarily people's dissatisfaction with how the party  handled the crisis, and they hold it responsible for the collapse as the party  had been in power so long. 'Olafur Thor Hardarson also from the University of Iceland adds: 'I feel that  the financial crisis in the world as a whole has had the effect that support for  the left has increased. 'The crisis raised other issues.  After the banks collapsed, considerable  discussion arose over whether Iceland would be better off within the EU, and  whether the Icelandic currency should be replaced with the euro.  The SDA strongly favours EU membership.  The Left-Green Party (LGP) wants a  national referendum on this.  The SDA wants a policy on the EU to be decided  before forming the cabinet. There is wider support now within parliament for a referendum.  The Citizen's  Movement (CM), a new political party that developed out of the protests after  the collapse of the Icelandic banks last October, gained four seats, getting  seven percent of the vote.  This is seen as a protest party for people who want  to change the way the Althingi (Icelandic parliament) operates.  'We want parliamentary committees to have deadlines, so that important  matters don't get lost in the system, and we want national referendums on all  major issues,' Birgitta Jonsdottir, one of the new CM members of parliament  told IPS.  'We want people to be able to dissolve the Althingi if it has become  unpopular, so we don't have a repeat of the last time. 'Jonsdottir says the public must decide on EU membership.  'They have to be  aware, for instance, that if Iceland joins the EU and if the EU decides to set up  a military force of its own, Icelandic boys might be required to serve in the  army.  We don't think Icelanders will be happy about that. ' Iceland has no  military force. Of the other parties in the Althingi, the Progressive Party (nine members) is  willing to start discussions on EU membership but the IP (16 members) says it  is not in Iceland's interests. A record 43 percent of the new Althingi members are women.  That brings  Iceland to fourth place on the Inter-Parliamentary Union list of women in  parliament, after Rwanda, Sweden and Cuba. SDP and LGP leaders appear confident about working together following their  period together in the caretaker government.  'We had no problems, and it  will be easier in a majority government,' says Helgi Hjorvar (SDP). The new government has serious matters to confront, besides rescuing bank  creditors and deciding whether to apply for EU membership.  One issue that  has to be sorted out soon is whether Iceland should attempt to get a  continuation of the Kyoto Protocol's Iceland Provision when the issue comes  up again later this year.    The Iceland Provision was the exemption given to Iceland when the Kyoto  Protocol came into effect in 2005, because of its reliance on renewable  energy sources.  Iceland was allowed to increase its greenhouse gas emissions  by 10 percent from their 1990 level, rather than decrease emissions by at  least 5 percent as most other signatories are required to.   