Israeli human rights organisation Yesh Din is taking the Israeli Defence Forces  (IDF), the Israeli civil administration and a number of Israeli mining companies  to court. The rights group alleges they are illegally stripping Palestinian West Bank  quarries of raw construction material for the benefit of the Israeli  construction industry and the building of illegal Israeli settlements.  Yesh Din has lodged a petition against the commander of the Israeli Defence  Forces (IDF), the Israeli civil administration and the mining companies with  the Israeli high court.   The Israeli mining companies involved operate under the jurisdiction of the  IDF and the civil administration, which issue the requisite mining permits. In its petition the rights group accuses them of the 'illegal practice of brutal  economic exploitation of a conquered territory to serve the exclusive  economic needs of the occupying power that bluntly and directly violates  basic principles of customary international law. ''Israel is transferring natural resources from the West Bank for Israeli  benefit, and this is absolutely prohibited not only under international law but  according to Israeli Supreme Court rulings,' says Michael Sfard, lawyer for  Yesh Din, which brought the case to Israel's high court.    'This is illegal transfer of land in the most literal of senses. 'International law as outlined by the Hague Regulation 55 states that an  occupying power is only permitted to administer public buildings, real estate,  forest and the agricultural estates of the state it is occupying.  The Hague Conventions were international treaties negotiated at the First  and Second Peace Conferences at The Hague in the Netherlands in 1899 and  1907, respectively.  Together with the Geneva Conventions, these were among the first formal  statements of the laws of war and war crimes. International law further stipulates that an occupying power has to pay the  occupied territory a lease should it profit from operations on its land, as well  as a percentage of the profits reaped therefrom. 'The profits from the quarries should be going back into the Palestinian  economy and Palestinian businesses should be benefiting from them, not  Israeli companies.  This is not happening,' said Jamil Mtoor, deputy chairman  of the Palestinian Environmental Authority (PEA) in Ramallah. 'Israel's removal of rocks, sand and gravel from the West Bank quarries is  negatively impacting the West Bank in other ways as well,' Mtoor told IPS. 'The quarries are damaging the ecological balance and biodiversity of the  area's flora and fauna.  They are also causing damage to agricultural land as  it takes time to rehabilitate the land at the quarried areas to the point where  it is fit again for agricultural use,' said Mtoor.   'Furthermore, the pollution levels associated with the quarries are adversely  affecting the health of Palestinians, with increased levels of asthma,  particularly amongst children, in the vicinity of the mining. 'Israel has strict laws governing noise and dust levels associated with quarries  inside Israel.  This is one of the reasons that makes operating in the West  Bank attractive for Israeli mining companies, as the Palestinian Authority (PA)  is unable to enforce environmental laws on Israel which controls the  territory. Israel has long argued that its occupation of the Palestinian West Bank is  primarily for security reasons.  However, the international community counters that the occupation enables  the continued expropriation of Palestinian resources such as land, water and  raw construction material, primarily for the expansion and establishment of  new illegal Israeli settlements.  A significant portion of the settlements are built from stones carved out of  the West Bank landscape.  But the bulk of the raw construction material goes  back for use within the green line, the internationally recognised border  which divides Israel proper from the West Bank. Israel has a shortage of construction material such as sand, gravel and  boulders.  An Israeli government study last year predicted a serious shortage  of raw building materials within a decade.  A number of building constructors  have been caught stealing truckloads of building material from the Negev  desert in the middle of the night. The ten West Bank quarries that are the focus of Yesh Din's lawsuit provide  Israel with a quarter, or 12 million tonnes, of its annual needs of 44 million  tonnes of construction material.  Furthermore, three-quarters of what is quarried in the West Bank goes to  Israel.  The Palestinian market purchases the remainder.  Further research by  Yesh Din indicates that the Israeli government plans to continue such  operations for at least the next three decades. According to a 2003 assessment by Palestinian officials, the main debtors,  including the Israeli Defence Ministry, the World Zionist Organisation, the  mining companies and Israeli gas stations owe the Palestinians millions of  dollars.      'The Israelis are stealing our natural resources, and this is against the Oslo  Agreement,' says Raed Abed Rabbo from the Applied Research Institute  Jerusalem (ARIJ), which researches and documents the effects of the Israeli  occupation in the Palestinian territories.  ARIJ will be working alongside Yesh Din as their Palestinian partner in the  fight against the continued exploitation of the West Bank's quarries.  'It is imperative that the implications of this continued mining is made  public.  Up till now the full impact of this has not been fully assessed and  studied, and there is not enough awareness about the problem at  governmental levels.  We intend to change this,' Abed Rabbo told IPS.   