Environmental groups are applauding President Barack Obama’s new nationwide rules for car emissions and mileage standards, announced Tuesday. The rules, which will begin to take effect in 2012, will put in place a tough federal standard for fuel efficiency, and impose the first-ever limit on climate-altering gases from cars and trucks. 'In addition to dramatically reducing the global warming emissions from our vehicles, this move will slash our dependence on oil and make us more energy independent,' Sierra Club executive director Carl Pope said in a statement. 'Congress put us on the road toward more fuel efficient vehicles two years ago when it passed the first increase in fuel economy standards in more than 30 years.  Now, President Obama is dramatically accelerating our progress,' he said. The new single national standard will create a car and light truck fleet in the U. S.  that is almost 40 percent cleaner and more fuel-efficient by 2016 than it is today, with an average of 35. 5 miles per gallon. 'While the United States makes up less than 5 percent of the world's population, we create roughly a quarter of the world's demand for oil,' Obama pointed out at a press conference Tuesday. 'And this appetite comes at a tremendous price - a price measured by our vulnerability to volatile oil markets, which send gas prices soaring and families scrambling,' he said. According to the Centre for American Progress Action Fund, in 2006, cars, light trucks, and other vehicles accounted for nearly 24 percent of U. S.  greenhouse gas emissions, with 94 percent as carbon dioxide. The new standards, covering model years 2012-2016, are projected to save 1. 8 billion barrels of oil over the life of the programme, with a fuel economy gain averaging more than 5 percent per year and a reduction of approximately 900 million metric tonnes in greenhouse gas emissions. 'Every bit of additional fuel efficiency is welcome for U. S.  vehicles,' said Ailis Aaron Wolf, spokesperson for 40MPG. org, a project of the non-profit Civil Society Institute.  'Anyone who thinks that oil prices are going to remain at relatively low levels for the long term is fooling themselves.  When gas pump prices jump again above three and four dollars, as experts predict that they will, Americans will once again flock to the most energy efficient vehicles available,' she said. The new plan adopts nationwide a standard proposed by California, setting the first-ever U. S.  limit on greenhouse gas pollution from vehicles.  The fuel efficiency standard for 2016 models matches the target set by California under a 2004 state law.  California has been seeking a federal waiver to set its own greenhouse-gas emissions standard under state law, and at least 17 states said they would follow.  Former President George W.  Bush turned down California’s waiver request in March 2008.  Obama, during his first week in office, directed the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) to reconsider the decision.  The EPA hasn’t made a final decision, and California has said it would defer to the federal standard if the waiver is granted. 'We applaud California and the other states that applied sufficient pressure on greenhouse gas controls to bring reluctant automakers to the bargaining table,' said 40MPG. org founder and Civil Society Institute President and Founder Pam Solo. 'The Obama White House also deserves credit for finding a way to get these parties to agree on a timetable that actually accelerates progress in the United States to achieving greater energy efficiency.  This is a historic and a great beginning for recovering America’s position in the global auto marketplace,' Solo said. Under Obama’s proposal, the EPA would set the new standard for tailpipe emissions of carbon dioxide, or greenhouse gas emissions.  The Transportation Department's National Highway Traffic Safety Administration would set the new fuel economy standards, calling for a 30 percent reduction.  By 2016, this would raise cars up to 39 miles per gallon and light trucks to 30 miles per gallon. 'The president brought all stakeholders to the table and came up with a plan to help the auto industry, safeguard consumers, and protect human health and the environment for all Americans,' said EPA Administrator Lisa Jackson. 'A supposedly 'unsolvable' problem was solved by unprecedented partnerships.  As a result, we will keep Americans healthier, cut tonnes of pollution from the air we breathe, and make a lasting down payment on cutting our greenhouse gas emissions,' she said. The White House says that meeting the standards will cost automakers 600 dollars a vehicle in addition to the 700-dollar-a-car cost automakers face under standards in existing law.  'Yes, it costs money to develop these vehicles, but even as the price to build these cars and trucks goes up, the cost of driving these vehicles will go down, as drivers save money at the pump,' said Obama. 'And this is a point I want to emphasise: If you buy a car, your investment in a more fuel-efficient vehicle as a result of this standard will pay off in just three years.  In fact, over the life of a vehicle, the typical driver would save about 2,800 dollars by getting better gas mileage,' he said. Automakers also embraced the new nationwide standards, as it would allow them to manufacture cars with the same fuel efficiency for all states. 'GM and the auto industry benefit by having more consistency and certainty to guide our product plans,' General Motors Corp.  Chief Executive Officer Fritz Henderson said in a statement.  'GM is fully committed to this new approach. ' The national programme brings together three regulatory bodies, 15 states, a dozen automakers and many environmental groups, according to Dave McCurdy, president and CEO of the Alliance of Automobile Manufacturers, which represents 11 carmakers, including GM, Chrysler LLC, Ford Motor Co.  and Toyota Motor Corp.  He said the announcement launches 'an era of cooperation'. 'We have an industry that after years of fighting tooth and nail against higher standards is finally coming to the table and saying they have technology and can do it,' said Ann Mesnikoff, director of the Green Transportation Campaign at the Sierra Club.  But McCurdy warns that national standards are only the first step.  The next steps require 'a comprehensive mix of support for new technologies, investment in infrastructure, and smart regulation. '