Geothermal energy has always been thought of as a clean, renewable form of  power, but since the Hellisheidi geothermal power plant began operation about  30 km from central Reykjavik in 2006, various problems have come to light. Not long after the station started producing electricity, Reykjavik residents  became aware that they had to clean silverware every three to four days  instead of three to four months because it was always covered with black  soot.  Truck drivers who drove daily to sand mines in the western part of  Hellisheidi found that the rubber in the suspension and steering systems of  their vehicles became hard and prone to breakage after only a year, whereas  normally it would take three to five years for this to happen. People suspected that the Hellisheidi plant was responsible for the damage,  but at first this was never discussed openly. Then in September 2008, people saw that the moss vegetation adjacent to  the Hellisheidi plant was severely damaged.  The company Reykjavik Energy  immediately arranged for research to be carried out on the moss damage,  together with research at two other geothermal plants, Nesjavellir and  Svartsengi, and a control site.  Moss damage was found at several places.  Although no definite conclusions  could be made because the effect of hydrogen sulphide (H2S) on moss has  not been researched, there are strong indications that sulphur, derived from  H2S, is the cause of the damage at Hellisheidi and nearby Nesjavellir.  The damage, in the form of patches of dead moss, occurred in spots  exposed to the prevailing wind from the direction of the plants.  Mercury,  which is a cumulative poison, was also found in high concentrations in the  dead moss from Nesjavellir.  The damage stems from the steam produced at the plant.  Most of this is  water, but 0. 4 percent of the steam contains gases of various kinds - 83  percent is carbon dioxide (CO2), 16 percent hydrogen sulphide (H2S), and  the remainder other gases.  Trace elements in the steam include sulphur,  mercury, boron, arsenic and aluminium. The environmental impact assessment (EIA) reports assumed that because  Hellisheidi is a windy, rainy place, most of the H2S would be transformed  into sulphur and washed away into the soil instead of being carried  elsewhere.  Nevertheless, in 2006 and 2007 several measuring gauges were  set up in the capital area to check the pollution levels. The Hellisheidi plant was brought into operation in September 2006.   Immediately, increased levels of H2S were seen in Reykjavik, especially when  the wind blew from the east or south-east, from the plant to Reykjavik.   Because of increasing concerns over H2S levels, more measuring devices are  being set up around the city, and the Environment Ministry has requested  the Environment Agency to find ways of reducing H2S levels overall. The Environment Ministry is also working towards a new regulation on the  release of H2S which will include maximum permissible discharge levels from  geothermal plants.  World Health Organisation (WHO) guidelines state that  exposure to H2S  should not exceed 150 micrograms per cubic metre, which  Reykjavik has exceeded once so far.  Are levels of H2S poisonous to human health? At very high levels, yes, says  Thorsteinn Johannsson, an air quality officer with the Environment Agency.   'But the levels found in Reykjavik would not cause health problems.  On the  other hand, we know very little about the long-term effects of H2S on  health.  Iceland would be a good place to research this,' he said in a recent  radio interview. Johannsson says it is technically possible to reduce H2S levels from  geothermal plants, but this is costly.  'Various methods are known which are  used all over the world,' he says.  'The disadvantages of these methods are  that pure sulphur, sulphuric acid or gypsum are left behind and there is an  over-supply of all these products on the world market.  However, Reykjavik  Energy are trying out an experimental project of pumping the H2S back into  the geothermal system. 'But can geothermal energy really be considered a renewable source of  energy? No, says Stefan Arnorsson, professor of geochemistry at the  University of Iceland.  'In general, geothermal energy is not a renewable  energy resource in the sense that the heat source is not replenished at a rate  equal to or higher than it is extracted.  This is clear for hot-dry rock systems  (not yet exploited economically) and geo-pressurised systems. 'It is also true for tectonic systems where hot water convects in permeable  fractures and the heat source is hot rock towards the base of the convection.   The same applies to mature volcanic geothermal systems that are no longer  charged by new magma that forms chambers in the roots of these systems. '  