Public pressure from Romanian citizens has forced one of the biggest European  producers of wood products, Austrian Kronospan, to halt construction of new  production lines and to improve environmental standards at its plants. The case is being seen as a sign that foreign investments are no longer  blindly welcomed in Eastern Europe.  The largest wood products manufacturer in south-eastern Europe,  Kronospan has been investing in Romania since 1999, and currently operates  three production points: one in Alba, western Romania, a second in Brasov,  in the centre of the country, and a third in Constanta, on the Black Sea coast.  One of its most controversial actions has been the construction of a second  production line at its plant in Sebes, Alba, in 2007.  The new line will be used  to manufacture formaldehyde, necessary for plywood adhesives.  Kronospan  only obtained the necessary approval in April 2009, after it had already built  the new structure. On May 13, two citizen groups from Sebes, The Independent Centre for the  Development of Environmental Resources and The Independent Centre for  the Protection of the Environment (CIDRM) filed an administrative complaint  against the decision to grant construction permits to Kronospan only later.  'Since the installation is already in place, any urban plan made to assess the  impact of this production line would basically adapt itself to the existing  structures, which defeats the whole purpose of using the urban plan as a  means to evaluate the impact of various locations and the utility of the  construction,' CIDRM director Dan Mercea told IPS.  The legality of the authorisation granted in 2009 for the already existing  production line is being further challenged on grounds of conflict of interest.   At the time the environmental agency in Alba was evaluating the granting of  permits to Kronospan, the head of the agency was Vasile Todea, who was  also the only stakeholder in Luxor Ltd. , one of the main business partners of  Kronospan. This fact, brought to public attention by the local groups, led the Court of  Appeals in Alba to suspend Todea from his position as head of the  environmental agency in March 2009. A similar controversy surrounds construction of the Kronospan plant in  Brasov.  Kronospan started to build its plant in Brasov in February 2008 on  the basis of an expired environmental permit, according to CIDRM.  The  company tried to prove in court that the permit was still valid, but the  municipal court in Brasov accepted the arguments of CIDRM. The court argued that, since the permit granted to Kronospan Brasov expired  in 2007, when tougher environmental standards were introduced in the  country's legislation because of entry to the European Union, the  environmental permit cannot be renewed automatically, and the construction  plan must be re-evaluated. An appeal by Kronospan against this decision was rejected by the Appeals  Court in February 2009, and building of the plant has been halted.  One of the main concerns of locals in Sebes and Brasov is the potential  toxicity of formaldehyde.  Formaldehyde released into the atmosphere is one  of the main components of smog.  The substance can be threatening to  human health in more direct ways as well: according to the International  Agency for Research on Cancer, occupational exposure to the substance can  lead to cancer, and the World Heath Organisation has declared formaldehyde  potentially cancerous.  Although the cancerous effects of the substance are still under debate in the  medical community, the inhabitants of Sebes, where Kronospan operates its  formaldehyde production line less than 300 metres from residential areas,  have expressed concern about their safety ever since the plant was built. Several incidents, when the emission levels for formaldehyde exceeded the  permitted level over five times, or when spillages of toxic substances were  registered, led the local environmental agencies to fine Kronospan.  Kronospan denies any wrongdoing.  'Unfounded accusations have been  brought against us continually,' Adrian Bacila, production director of  Kronospan declared in a public statement sent to Romanian media.  'We have  always been open to any study or analysis of our activity.  But, until now, no  study has shown that we are systematically breaking the legal levels of  emissions or that the activity of our company endangers the lives of people. ' Representatives of the company attending public debates in Sebes and  Brasov have provided detailed pictures of technological upgrades being  implemented at their production lines in order to limit the risks of dangerous  emissions or accidents.  