The world is on track towards negotiating a solid deal in Copenhagen at the  end of this year, Yvo de Boer, the UN's top climate change official, told  reporters at the opening of a 12-day conference in Bonn Monday. 'The political moment is right to reach an agreement,' said De Boer,  executive secretary of the UN Framework Climate Change Convention  (UNFCCC).  'There is no doubt in my mind that the Copenhagen climate  conference in December is going to lead to a result. ' If the world has learnt anything from the financial crisis, he said, 'it is that  global issues require a global response. ' He added, however that 'there are  some tough nuts to crack' and that success in Copenhagen requires 'delivery  on four political essentials. 'The four essentials, as he termed them, are: clarity on how much  industrialised countries would reduce their emissions up to 2020; clarity on  what developing countries would do to limit the growth of their emissions;  stable finance from industrialised nations for the developing world to  mitigate climate change and adapt; and a 'governance regime'.  The significance of Yvo de Boer's remarks is underlined by the fact that in a  new document posted on the website of China's economic policy-making  National Development and Reform Commission (NDRC), China is asking  industrial countries to slash their greenhouse gas emissions by no less than  40 percent by 2020 from 1990 levels. China is also calling upon the rich countries to provide at least 0. 5 to 1  percent of their annual gross domestic product to help developing countries  grapple with climate change. China considers these two objectives significant for implementing the  Roadmap emerging from the climate change conference 2007 in Bali.  That  roadmap includes a number of forward-looking decisions that represent  various tracks essential to reaching a secure climate future.  De Boer said developing countries wanted to be 'adequately represented' on  bodies fighting global warming.  Their commitments to act on climate change  were 'encouraging'.  They had made clear, he said, that they needed to know  'about the kind of financial support that is going to be available. ' De Boer's remarks were in tune with the statements issued by the climate  change secretariat ahead of the second Bonn conference since the global  gathering last December in the Polish city Poznan. In a media advisory May 20, De Boer said the world was 'not standing still on  climate change. ' There had been 'encouraging developments' in negotiations  over the previous 100 days, he said. 'We have an almost complete list of industrialised nations' pledges to cut  emissions after 2012, so governments can see now more clearly where they  are in comparison to each other, and can build a higher ambition on that  basis,' he said. The U. S.  had committed itself to a Copenhagen agreement and a clean  energy future, he said.  Industrialised countries were giving developing  nations due credit for the climate change strategies they already have in  place, he added.  The statement said: 'In response to the financial crisis, many national  stimulus packages have been launched that include green economic  objectives.  With only 200 days before Copenhagen, time gets tighter but the  world is not standing still on climate change. 'Announcing that the central text to be negotiated under the UNFCCC, which  will form the basis of an ambitious and effective international response to  climate change to be agreed in Copenhagen in December, had been posted  on the UNFCCC website, De Boer said: 'This document marks an important  point on our road. ' 'It's the first time a real negotiating text will be on the table which can serve  as a basis for governments to start drafting a Copenhagen agreed outcome,'  he added.  The 53-page text covers the issues of a shared vision for long- term cooperative action, along with enhanced action on adaptation,  mitigation and finance, technology and capacity building, he said. However, as is the case with all negotiating texts, the draft text of a post- Kyoto protocol (that expires 2012) is far from being a final draft.  'The text is a starting point, and now is the time for parties to take position  and enrich it,' former UNFCCC executive secretary Michael Zammit Cutajar  under whose stewardship the UN Convention gained ground and the Kyoto  Protocol was agreed, said Monday.  The salient feature of the Kyoto Protocol is that it sets binding targets for 37  industrialised countries and the European community for reducing  greenhouse gas emissions.  These amount to a five percent reduction against  1990 levels over the five-year period 2008-2012.  The Kyoto Protocol was adopted in Kyoto, Japan, Dec.  11, 1997 and entered  into force Feb.  16, 2005.  In all 184 parties of the Convention have ratified it  to date.  Detailed rules for implementation of the protocol were adopted at  the seventh conference of parties to the UNFCCC (COP 7) in Marrakesh in  2001, and are referred to as the 'Marrakesh Accords'. The current session that kicked off Monday is the second round of UN  climate change talks in Bonn.  The gathering that ends Jun.  12 is being  attended by more than 4,000 participants, including government delegates  from 182 countries, and representatives from business and industry,  environmental organisations and research institutions. The next meeting ahead of the Copenhagen conference Dec.  7-18 will take  place Aug.  10-14 in Bonn, to be followed by a gathering in Bangkok from  Sep.  28 to Oct.  9 and another meeting Nov.  2-16 in Barcelona.   