When they got out of bed one morning in April this year, the residents of Vi  Thanh City here in southern Vietnam’s Mekong Delta were surprised to find that  their water had become salty.  During the night, seawater had intruded into the Xa No canal, the main  source of water for the city of 200,000 people. 'Never in my life have I seen the water at Vi Thanh become that salty,' said  76 year-old Nguyen Duc Bon, who was born in the city.  'Our running water  has become so salty that we could not use it for cooking or for washing. 'For daily use, inhabitants now have to buy fresh water supplied from the  nearby regional centre of Can Tho at high prices. A dam is being built to prevent the penetration of saltwater, but it will not be  finished until 2011. The area’s farmers also worry that their 37,000 hectares of paddies and  aquaculture could be totally destroyed by the seawater intrusion. Many factors are being blamed for the change in water quality - hydropower  construction upstream on the Mekong River, global warming, and, ironically,  the network of small dams build by local farmers themselves to protect their  crops and aquaculture products. There are two seasons in the Mekong Delta, the dry season, usually taking  place from    May to November; and the rainy season, from December to April. During the dry season, the water level of the Mekong is very low, enabling  the intrusion of saltwater. During the rainy season, the Mekong overflows, flooding the delta but also  washing out the areas recently invaded by seawater. To fight these floods, local farmers have built a network of dams to protect  their crops and aquaculture products - a method that in previous years was  acclaimed as an innovation because it helped farmers continue producing  even in the rainy season.  Now, however, these dams have turned out to be  one of the causes of saline intrusion. 'Because of these closed dams, the overwhelming quantity of flooding water  is not retained [in the soil] and thus runs out into the sea,' said Le Van Banh,  president of the Mekong Delta Institute of Rice.  'When the dry season comes,  the small quantity of underground water that remains is not enough to stem  the invading seawater. 'With global warming, April and May have become the hottest months of the  dry season -at a time when the Mekong’s level of water is at its lowest. This has resulted in further seawater intrusion into the dried-out regions of  the Delta. According to experts, seawater intruded up to 70 kilometres into some parts  of the Delta during the 2009 dry season - the farthest distance in the last 20  years.  More than 20,000 hectares of crops throughout the Delta have been  immersed in saltwater. 'The areas covered by sea water extend year by year,' Vu Anh Phap, of the  Institute for the Development of the Mekong Delta, told Radio France  International in an interview.  'The salinity is also increasing. 'Phap said that due to intensive irrigation in the Mekong region in the past  few years, especially by farmers in upstream countries like Laos and  Cambodia, the water level downstream has gone lower and lower and allowed  greater penetration of seawater. Increasing dam construction projects upstream is also widely viewed as  another major cause of the water shortages downstream. 'These dams have reduced the water flow of the Mekong significantly,' said  Ky Quang Vinh, head of the Centre for Natural Resources and Environment in  Can Tho. 'Water shortage has already occurred this year and will be more critical in the  coming years,' added Vinh.  'Even in time of floods, the water flow of the  Mekong in downstream has also been reduced. 'In October, he said, it fell from 40,000 cubic metres a second to 28,000 cubic  metres a second. The shortage of water in the Mekong emerged as a matter of significant  public concern in Vietnam in late May after the newspaper ‘Tuoi Tre’ cited a  United Nations report saying that dams built by China on the upper reaches  of the Mekong could have significant implications for Vietnam. The report stated: 'China’s extremely ambitious plan to build a massive  cascade of eight dams on the upper half of the Mekong River, as it tumbles  through the high gorges of Yunnan Province, may pose the single greatest  threat to the river. ' It went on to say the impacts of the proposed dam  development could include 'changes in river flow volume and timing, water  quality, deterioration and loss of biodiversity. 'These dam developments include the recently completed Xiaowan dam, which  at 292 metres is the world’s tallest and has a reservoir storage capacity equal  to all the other Southeast Asia reservoirs combined. It is part of China’s long-term plan to direct water for irrigation and  hydropower to dry areas of the country. 'Dams are already big at heights of 15 metres, and 292 metres is  unbelievable,' Vinh told ‘Tuoi Tre’. '[Chinese] dam construction now joins hands with climate change to worsen  droughts, salinity intrusion, landslides and land erosion,' Ngo Dinh Tuan,  chair of the scientific council of the South-east Asia Institute of Water  Resource and Environment, told ‘Tuoi Tre’. 'The Vietnamese government must create a national strategy for protecting  the river downstream, not only for the Mekong but the Red River [in  Vietnam’s north], as China has started to build dams on it as well,' Tuan  added. The U. N.  report also found increasingly low water levels at several river basins  such as Tonle Sap in Cambodia, Nam Khan in Laos and Sekong-Sesan in  Cambodia and Vietnam. 