New scientific research suggests that climate change is taking place faster than  foreseen in studies considered so far, according to environmental experts at a  forum on climate change called by the Global Legislators Organisation for a  Balanced Environment (GLOBE). 'We have run out of time,' Ashok Khosla, president of the International Union  for Conservation of Nature (IUCN), the world's largest environmental  association, told IPS.  'Climate change is happening at a swifter speed than we  thought so far. 'Khosla, an Indian national, holds degrees in physics and natural sciences, and  has taught and worked on environmental and social economics since the  1970s.  He leads several non-governmental organisations committed to  human development. Katherine Richardson, a leading marine biologist researching the effect of  climate change effect on the oceans, told IPS, 'Sea levels are rising 50 percent  faster than expected by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change  (IPCC). 'If humankind does not stop climate change in the immediate future, at the  observed present rate sea levels shall rise by at least one metre by the year  2010. ' This would aggravate the catastrophic consequences already forecast  for human settlements along coasts, especially in the developing world, she  said. The acidity of oceans' water is also increasing rapidly, Richardson said.  'If  nothing changes to stop global warming, by 2065 no region will have corals. 'This degradation of the oceans has been provoked by a fast rise in  greenhouse gases (GHG) emissions.  'The emissions in the last three or four  years were all above the estimated range of projections,' Richardson said.   'Since 1990, emissions have risen by 17 percent. 'This growth in GHG emissions since 1990 has important relative and absolute  value because that year's emissions are used to measure reductions foreseen  in the Kyoto protocol.  Under Kyoto, industrialised countries agreed to reduce  their collective GHG emissions by 5. 2 percent compared to 1990 levels. The growth is dramatic, because 'societies and ecosystems are highly  vulnerable to even modest levels of climate change.  Temperature rises above  two degrees Celsius will be very difficult for contemporary societies to cope  with,' Richardson said. Khosla said that conventional wisdom on climate change is that average rise  in temperatures should not go beyond two degrees Celsius in order to keep  rising concentration of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere below 400 parts per  million (ppm). 'But we are already at 387 ppm,' Khosla said.  'We have practically no time to  stop this growth of greenhouse gases emissions. 'Despite intense international dialogue over the last 40 years on the  environmental consequences of economic growth, and almost 20 years of  debates on how to tackle climate change and solve the environmental crisis  associated with global warming, 'practically nothing has been reached so  far,' Ian Dunlop, an Australian economist and expert on energy told IPS. 'Since 1972, when the Club of Rome published its study on the 'Limits of  Growth', and outlined the problem of unsustainable economic growth,  humankind has proved incapable of accepting, so far, that the most  important factor for our own survival is the preservation of a biosphere fit for  human habitation,' Dunlop said.  The Club of Rome is a global think-tank that  carried out pioneering work on climate change. Richardson, Khosla, and Dunlop were in Rome Jun.  12-13 to participate in  the international forum on climate change organised by GLOBE.  The forum  brought together more than 100 environmental legislators from 13 countries,  and several scientists and experts. Dunlop pointed out that because of the global economic depression,  industrialised nations are trying to encourage more consumption.   'Governments are applying economic measures conceived some 80 years ago  to stimulate old industries and save banks, and by so doing are skyrocketing  their deficits and debts, thus crowding out investments in environmental  policies,' he said. The solutions for tackling climate change are clear, Dunlop said.  'The  problem is that vested interests, representing the old economy, which caused  climate change, keep a tight hold of politics. ' Khosla said the world is ravaged by a demographic crisis and by an unjust  concentration of income, closely linked to a dramatic degradation of the  environment. 'The richest fifth of the world's population takes some 85 percent of the  world's income,' Khosla said.  'Meanwhile 2. 5 billion people, well over one- third of the world's population, must survive with less than two dollars per  day. 'At the same time, the poorest people are the main victims of the  environmental degradation associated with climate change and the depletion  of nature by the present economic model.  'Some three to four billion people  are surviving on a landscape of poverty, vulnerability, and environmental  degradation,' Khosla said. New global policies must, he said, aim to increase human development in the  poorest countries to solve 'the climate change paradox: by 2050, the world  will have several billion extra tonnes of carbon emissions, unless the poorest  populations have access to higher levels of energy services. ' This is only  possible with 'human, sustainable development, now, and for all inhabitants  of the world. 'Colin Bradford, economist at the Brookings Institute in the U. S. , called on  governments to 'recover economics from neo-liberal ideologies. ' Since the  1970s, he said, following the rise to power of former British prime minister  Margaret Thatcher and former U. S.  president Ronald Reagan, 'economics  stopped to be a social science and became a prisoner of ideologues. 'These ideologues' belief that free markets would correct themselves, and set  the prices right, 'has proven utterly wrong,' Bradford told IPS.  'For instance,  the oil market price is wrong, the carbon market price is wrong, both are too  low. 'The prices of both have a strong impact on climate change.  A low price makes  both fossil fuels more competitive compared with low-carbon energy  sources.  Scientists agree that the combustion of fossil fuels, which produces  high amounts of carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases, is the main  cause of global warming and climate change.   