As the December deadline for reaching a global climate deal in Copenhagen  approaches, China is claiming leadership - rallying emerging economies to  defend their rights to development and strike bargaining positions with rich  nations.  While a string of U. S.  top envoys have been visiting Beijing over recent weeks  in attempt to negotiate a preliminary agreement with China that would lay  the foundations for Copenhagen talks, in a first China has hosted climate  change negotiators from the largest developing countries. In late May envoys from Brazil, India and South Africa took part in a meeting  titled 'Towards Copenhagen: Developing Countries and Climate Change,'  organised by the Shanghai Institute for International Studies and attended by  China’s climate change negotiator at the Foreign Ministry Yu Qingtai. It is at that meeting that Yu first elaborated China’s position on climate  change that diplomats meeting with U. S.  negotiators on global warming this  week have been repeating. Yu spoke of the world’s 'common but differentiated responsibilities' when it  comes to actions to prevent climate change.  He said China was acting  according to its 'national conditions,' and considering the lack of  international consensus on preventing climate change Beijing’s domestic  efforts to reduce emissions were praiseworthy and 'undeniable. 'Yu also rallied developing nations to be 'united' in facing the global warming  challenge - giving priority to their right to develop and eradicate poverty. 'Without development, we will lose everything, including the ability to  contribute to the global fight on climate change,' Yu told delegates at the  meeting. The same line of thought underlies tense talks on climate policy held between  Washington and Beijing this week.  U. S.  special climate envoy Todd Stern’s  two-day visit to Beijing was perceived as aiming to press rapidly-growing  China to commit to hard numbers on greenhouse gas emissions under the  next global warming agreement. But Vice-Premier Li Keqiang reasserted China’s insistence on 'common but  differentiated responsibilities' under which developed countries such as the  U. S.  would bear most of the responsibility for reducing greenhouse gas  emissions.  Beijing has refused to accept a ceiling on greenhouse gas output.   It argues that rich countries are the biggest culprits of global warming while  they also have the means to fix the problem. U. S.  envoy Todd Stern told the China Daily at the end of his trip that the U. S.   would not push China to adopt a mandatory cap on emissions 'at this stage. ''We understand China’s paramount need to grow and develop for its people,'  he said.  'Our demand is that the development with the available technologies  is based on low carbon growth. 'China’s stance on a future climate change agreement was outlined in a policy  paper published May 21 in advance of the United Nations Framework  Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) taking place in Copenhagen in  December. The document called for developed nations to reduce their greenhouse gas  emissions 40 percent below 1990 levels by 2020 and to donate 0. 5-1 percent  of their GDP to help developing nations cope with the effects of climate  change.  The National Development and Reform Commission, which steers  Chinese climate change policy, said any new agreement must ensure wealthy  nations 'take on quantified targets to drastically reduce emissions. 'But mindful that some developing nations like sub-Saharan and island  countries that are particularly vulnerable to the consequence of climate  change could lean towards imposing mandatory targets for greenhouse gases  reduction on the developing world, China has acted to prevent such actions. In the same document Beijing took the lead at forming a united front of  developing nations - pledging to increase its aid to developing countries  most affected by global warming.  The destruction of forests and the threat to  island nations by rising seas were specifically mentioned. An editorial in the China Business News on May 25 called on all developing  nations to 'stick together. ' 'In this complicated international situation,  staying firm together on climate change is vital for developing countries,' it  said.  'And China, in particular, should lead that effort. 'China and the U. S.  are jointly responsible for more than 40 percent of the  world’s greenhouse gas emissions.  China’s emissions are outpacing that of  the U. S. , but Beijing argues that a large chunk of this is caused by export- driven manufacturing and has suggested that purchasing countries should be  responsible for tackling those emissions. Beijing is however, very much aware of the dangers climate change is posing  to its future economic development. The press highlights China’s vulnerability to water shortages, crop declines  and sea level rise almost daily.  Earlier this year northern China suffered its  most severe drought since 1951.  The State Oceanic Administration reports  that in 2008 China’s coasts saw their biggest sea level rise ever, an average  increase of 14 mm compared to 2007. Without committing to mandatory caps on emissions, Chinese leaders have  embarked on a series of unilateral measures to reduce the release of carbon  dioxide - the gas believed to be most responsible for global warming.  They  have stepped up investment in renewable energy, creating a domestic fervour  for wind and solar power.  They have also committed to increasing the  efficiency of their manufacturing, buildings and vehicles. The latest measure - announced during the U. S.  climate change envoy’s visit  to Beijing - revised China’s original target of 15 percent renewable energy by  2020 to 20 percent over the same period. But the U. S.  says Beijing is still not doing enough. 'Even if every other country in the world cut its emissions by 80 percent by  2050 China’s business-as-usual emissions would cause global average  temperatures to increase by 2. 7 degrees centigrade,' warned U. S.  Assistant  Secretary of Energy David Sandalow earlier this week in a speech delivered in  Beijing. Beijing for its part, points the finger at the low targets set by some  industrialised nations.  China says the U. S.  should reduce its greenhouse gas  emissions by 40 percent below 1990 levels by 2020, but the bill presented to  the U. S.  Congress for deliberation calls for less than a 4 percent reduction  over that period. China has criticised Japan as well, saying its proposed cut of 15 percent by  2020 announced this week is inadequate.  'According to my calculation, the  new target amounts to only a 2 percentage point advance from Japan’s  previous pledge in the first commitment period,' Foreign Ministry Spokesman  Qin Gang told the press Thursday. The Copenhagen agreement expected to be agreed in December will succeed  the 1997 Kyoto Protocol, which required 37 industrial nations to cut their  emissions by a total 5 percent from 1990 levels - but demanded nothing  from developing nations.  China has ratified the treaty.  The U. S.  has not.  Two  previous U. S.  administrations rejected the treaty - arguing that without  targets assigned to fast-expanding economies like China, India and Brazil,  the treaty was useless. 