Beijing has reined in China’s unbridled dam-building spree, issuing warnings to  power-hungry developers that stimulating the economy in a time of crisis  should not be used as an excuse to forego environmental reviews of big  hydroelectric projects.  Nevertheless, the country remains committed to a series of dam schemes  outside of its borders as its role grows as a global financier and builder. Over the last few months, Beijing has pulled the plug on several highly  controversial dam projects in resource-rich southwestern China - delighting  environmentalists and sending a warning to wayward localities to toe its line. 'What we see now reflects a decision made by the very top leadership to  balance development with environmental protection,' says Ma Jun, director of  the Institute of Public and Environmental Affairs.  'It is not an easy decision to  make in the middle of an economic crisis and it illustrates Beijing’s  determination. 'Last week, China’s environmental watchdog suspended approval for  hydropower stations along the middle reaches of the Jinsha (Yangtze) river.  It  made the decision after finding out that two of the mainland’s biggest power  companies have begun illegal construction to dam the river. The announcement comes on the heels of a reported decision by Beijing in  late May to halt work on another controversial dam planned on the Nu river -  also called the Salween by downstream countries. The Liuku hydropower station on one of China’s last free-flowing rivers in  Yunnan province has been subject to a long-term debate about its impact on  ecology and local communities, and will be reviewed once more before  construction of the dam is allowed to proceed, the Hong Kong press reported. All three suspended projects were to have been constructed in a region of  China known for its outstanding natural beauty and riches.  At its core lies the  protected area of the Three Parallel Rivers of Yunnan - a World Heritage site  with diverse ethnic minority cultures and home to some of China’s most  important biodiversity. It is also where three of Asia’ greatest rivers - the Nu (Salween), Lancang  (Mekong) and Jinsha (Yangtze) run almost parallel before two of them wind  their way into Southeast Asia. But the area is also one of China’s last untapped sources of hydropower, and  local authorities have been eager to capitalise on this wealth.  They contend  that developing hydropower is essential to give an economic boost to one of  the country’s most impoverished areas, help eradicate poverty, and meet  other regions’ demands for electricity. When plans to build up to 13 dams on the Nu river were announced in the  early 2000, they caused an international outcry that prompted Premier Wen  Jiabao to suspend preparations for the projects in 2004. Fierce opposition from downstream countries and warnings by the United  Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organisation (UNESCO) that the  dams would endanger the Three Parallel Rivers site led to downscaling of the  Nu river hydropower plan.  Four dams are now being proposed, including the  one at Liuku. Another system of cascading eight hydropower works is being planned for the  middle reaches of the Jinsha (Yangtze) river, with a total investment of 30  billion dollars.  The power stations are expected to generate as much  electricity as the controversial Three Gorges Dam - about 20 gigawatts. Beijing’s latest move to block construction on the Jinsha comes as two  Chinese companies - Huadian and Huaneng - ignored legal procedures for  conducting an environmental assessment of hydro-works and began  damming the river. 'To protect the management of the environment and to punish the violation  of the environment and illegal acts regarding the environment, the  environmental ministry decided to suspend the construction projects in the  middle reaches of the Jinsha River,' a statement from the Ministry of  Environmental Protection said. Huaneng Power and Huadian Power are among China’s top five state-owned  companies, created after the break-up of the state power monopoly in 2002.   Since its inception, Huaneng has been dominated by the family of former  Premier Li Peng - a long-time advocate of large dams, and a key figure in the  Three Gorges Dam project. Both companies have been heavily involved in developing the water resources  of China’s southwest. After Beijing unveiled a 4-trillion yuan (585 billion dollar) economic stimulus  package last fall - allowing many localities to fast-track projects in order to  revive growth - Yunnan and Sichuan provinces accelerated work on planned  dam projects. Hydrologist Liu Shukun estimates that if all of the planned hydropower  stations in southwestern China are built over the next 10 years, the amount  of electricity generated would equal the output of five Three Gorges Dams. 'Abundant power is all good, but the problem is that exploitation of water  resources at such scale has also a greater range of negative effects on  everything from nature to local communities,' Liu said. For now, the suspension of the Ludila hydropower project by Huadian and the  Longkaikou project by Huaneng has given the green lobby fresh hope.  Both  projects are downstream of China’s famous Tiger Leaping Gorge - one of the  deepest river canyons in the world that power companies and local officials  have targeted for projects in the past. What seems particularly encouraging to observers is the fact that in  announcing this suspension, environmental ministry spokesman Tao Detian  highlighted the connection between the two downstream projects and the  Tiger Leaping Gorge. Confronted with public opposition to controversial projects in the past, the  power companies’ strategy has always been to build downstream works first,  and then argue that without completing the projects upstream, the  investment made will be wasted. 'The latest decision of the environmental ministry targets this particular line  of thinking - that more investment should be made on the assumption that  all dams will be unquestionably approved,' said Ma Jun.  'In many cases, a lot  of money is invested even before the official approval of the projects. 'However, the latest suspension of dam projects has resurrected fears that  putting to a halt projects on the Jinsha or Nu rivers could prompt local  authorities to plan more dams in areas like the Lancang (Mekong), which is  shared with Cambodia, Laos, Thailand, Vietnam and Burma. China has eight existing or planned Mekong mainstream dams and has  thrown its financial clout and technical expertise behind many more that are  on the drawing board.  The impact of these dams on downstream countries is  currently under review by the Mekong River Commission (MRC), the  intergovernmental body responsible for cooperation on the sustainable  management of the Mekong basin. In the past, MRC member countries - Thailand, Cambodia, Laos and Vietnam  - have raised opposition to China’s dams, citing resettlement issues and  reduction in fisheries yield.  But now many are heeding China’s example,  contemplating the development of a series of hydropower schemes on the  Mekong. 'Like other countries, China is essentially exporting its own development  experience abroad - through building dams and many other projects,' Peter  Bosshard, policy director of the NGO International Rivers, said in an e-mail. But as the recent decision to halt the dams shows, 'the Chinese government  has come to realise that a development strategy that puts economic growth  above all other interests is exacting a huge toll from the environment, public  health, and long-term prosperity,' Bosshard said.  'This is as true at home as  in other countries. 'For the Mekong river, which serves as a food artery to millions of people in a  way that no other river does, a reversal in policy may come a little too late. Eric Baran, research scientist at the World Fish Centre for the Greater Mekong  Region, says it took France 200 years to dam all its rivers and this  development was accompanied by the onset of the Industrial Revolution,  which provided other alternatives for livelihood. 'Here we are talking about a process to be completed within 15 to 20 years,'  he said during a recent interview in Phnom Penh.  'In one case, people had  time to adjust and in the other, people would have to deal with consequences  within one generation. '