The promotion of biodiversity in agriculture needs political backing, Emile  Frison, Bioversity International Director-General tells IPS in an interview.  This  kind of biodiversity can provide food security and promote health, he says. Bioversity International is the largest international research organisation  dedicated to conservation and use of agricultural biodiversity.  Frison spoke to  IPS about the need to value this kind of biodiversity. IPS: Why is agricultural biodiversity so important?EMILE FRISON: There are about 30,000 edible plant species.  Yet just three of  these (rice, wheat, maize) provide 60 percent of our calories.  Agricultural  biodiversity is the foundation for our food, our medicines, and all of the other  goods we depend on to live.  It has inestimable value socially, economically,  scientifically, culturally and even aesthetically.  But if this value is not better  recognised, agricultural biodiversity is in danger of disappearing. The loss of agricultural biodiversity is a silent extinction.  There is no 'red list'  for endangered agricultural species.  What is at risk is no less than our future  food security, the health and wellbeing of all humanity. IPS: What are you doing to raise public awareness on this?EF: A year ago Bioversity International launched an international awareness  campaign, Diversity for Life, with the aim of sharing the benefits of  agricultural biodiversity.  The campaign will spotlight the  Guardians of Diversity, people who have devoted their lives to ensuring  that the diversity of plants and animals is conserved. The seven Guardians we honoured this year have dedicated their lives to  slowing the loss of this precious resource in the Mediterranean.  The  importance of their contribution cannot be overestimated.  The Guardians are  being honoured not only to celebrate their own personal accomplishments,  but also to recognise the thousands of unsung heroes that every day dedicate  themselves to protecting and conserving plant and animal diversity. There are many hundreds of people around the world who have dedicated  their lives to using and sharing the wealth of agricultural biodiversity.  We  hope to recognise a fresh set of Guardians every year. IPS: What is Bioversity's overall task?EF: Bioversity International's aim is to improve the life of rural people across  the globe.  We try to achieve this goal through scientific research that will help  reduce poverty, increase food security, and guarantee productive agriculture  and incomes for farmers.  Conserving agricultural biodiversity in gene banks is not enough if we do not  also safeguard the knowledge around its use and benefits, and if we don't  work with farmers on the ground searching together for solutions to old and  new problems, such as climate change.  For example, we recently launched a research programme to assess how a  mixture of rice varieties can be used for reducing pest and diseases in rice  cultivation in China.  In a pilot study the benefits in terms of farmers' incomes  increased by 40 percent when diversity was correctly used.  Now we want to  expand that research to see how other farmers in China and elsewhere can  make use of biodiversity. Farmers' knowledge is central in our research, and their contribution is crucial  in solving the problems that agriculture is facing today, in the context of the  economic and food prices crisis. IPS: A recent declaration of the G8 development ministers in view of the G8  meeting in July seems to recognise the importance of agriculture for  development.  But support to agriculture has fallen from 17 percent of total  aid spending in 1980 to less than 3 percent in 2006.  Do you think that  research in agriculture can be considered good investment for economic  development?EF: In fact, this is the first time there is such strong accent on agriculture.   There has been a call for action, not just for rhetoric, particularly in  agriculture and food security.  And a recognition also that the challenge of  tackling food security and the problem of nutrition is something that needs to  be science based, so that policies can be put in place that will be  appropriate. An increase in investment in agriculture has been made virtually by all the  development ministers of the G8 who recognised that we need to look at the  longer-term solutions, including through research.  And support to public  research into agriculture is the most effective investment to promote long- term economic development; it offers a better return on investment than  other forms of aid.  We need to look at food security not only in terms of quantity of food but the  quality of food, that will have an impact on health outcomes.  And that  requires diverse diet based on a broad use of local agriculture biodiversity. Miren Gutierrez is IPS Editor-in-Chief.   