Predicting the monsoons - a risky proposition despite the deployment of  satellites and supercomputers - appears to have become iffier thanks to climate  change. As the spectre of drought looms up across India thanks to this season’s  seriously deficient monsoon - so far - it looks as if the days when India’s  farming was referred to as a ‘gamble with the monsoons’ are returning. 'There is growing evidence to suggest that climate change is making the  monsoons more unpredictable and worsening the severity of events like  floods and droughts,' Vinuta Gopal, energy and climate change campaigner  for Greenpeace, told IPS. Gopal says that while there is no scientific evidence yet to link this year’s  truant monsoon to climate change, what is clear is that the 'modelling  systems of the Indian Meteorological Department (IMD) cannot make  predictions with any degree of accuracy. ' This means that farmers cannot  depend on the forecasts to time sowing, harvesting and all that goes in  between. 'Farmers we [Greenpeace] spoke with in the four southern states [Kerala,  Tamil Nadu, Andhra Pradesh and Karnataka] told us that even traditional  methods of forecasting have become undependable,' Gopal said.  'What is  certain is that the intensity and frequency of storms and spells of rain and  drought are becoming commonplace, but exactly how precipitation patterns  are changing is still to be worked out. 'On Apr.  17, IMD made an optimistic initial forecast for the South-West  Monsoon that said that countrywide average cumulative rainfall for the  season would be 96 percent of long-term average, allowing five percent  either way for model error. But this week India’s Minister for Science and Technology Prithviraj Chauhan  scaled that down to 93 percent of the 89 cm (35 inches) of rainfall that ought  to fall in the June-September monsoon season - if major crops such as  sugarcane, oilseeds and rice are not to suffer. Chauhan’s announcement brought gloom to a country hoping to make up for  recessionary trends through a good harvest.  Only a third of India’s arable  land is irrigated - with the rest depending on monsoon rainfall and on  underground water pumped up from aquifers using bore wells. The last time India suffered a drought was in 2002, when economic growth  slumped to four percent, dramatically illustrating the impact of monsoons on  the economy.  The following year when India had the best rainfall in five  years, the economic growth sprang back to 8. 5 percent.  In 2004, the rains  were the second lowest in two decades and growth slowed to 6. 9 percent.   The nine percent growth India experienced in 2005 and 2007 was  accompanied by normal rainfall during those years.  Pradhan Parth Sarthi, a climate scientist with the prestigious Energy Research  Institute, told IPS that the Indian summer monsoon remains a 'complex and  mysterious phenomenon' and that it is a hard task for any meteorologist to  predict its course and precipitation 'through existing statistical and dynamical  models. ''While climate change has little impact on average annual rainfall, going by  rainfall data studied over a 100-year period, it is seen that during the  monsoons heavy to very heavy rainfall is increasing in some areas and rainfall  of lowered intensity is decreasing in other areas.  These trends compensate  each other in terms of net rainfall but they can be disruptive of normal  agriculture,' Sarthi said. El Niño (abnormal rise in sea surface temperature over the equatorial central  Pacific Ocean), one of several factors that can delay or cause a failure of the  monsoons, seems to have caused a 50 percent reduction in normal rainfall in  June, Sarthi said.  'We are hoping that the situation will revive in July, the  principal rainy season, when El Niño weakens over the central, equatorial  Pacific Ocean. ''El Niño is already known to cause droughts and it will be fair to say that  global warming may act to exacerbate these extreme events,' Sarthi  observed. 'Although it is impossible to predict the effects of global warming on the  frequency of El Niños, all indications seem to be that they are becoming  stronger, more common, and are no longer disappearing completely,' says  Kevin E.  Trenberth, a lead author of the 2001 and 2007 United Nations  Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC)’s scientific assessments of  climate change.  'In other words, the Pacific doesn’t seem to be reverting to  ‘normal’ anymore,' Trenberth says in a report for the David Suzuki  foundation. For Gopal what is truly worrisome is a complacent attitude in which  anomalous weather conditions are gradually becoming accepted as normal -  and this despite a series of catastrophic events over the last few years. In 2006, Cherrapunji in India’s northeast - famed as the wettest place on  earth - received considerably lower amounts of rainfall, whereas arid, desert  states such as western Rajasthan received unusual amounts of rainfall,  bringing in its wake all manner of calamities, including diseases. The July 2005 Mumbai deluge wreaked havoc in the western metropolis,  causing billions of dollars of damage and the loss of hundreds of lives.   Surging floodwaters triggered by the 2002 monsoon killed more than 800  people in Bangladesh, India and Nepal and displaced millions.  This year  Cyclone Aila devastated coastal Bangladesh leaving over 24,000 people  homeless, and destroying large tracts of mangrove forests. 'The intensity and frequency of freak spells of rain and drought, cyclones and  storms are only getting worse by the year.  Science increasingly suggests that  climate change is going to change the pattern of the Indian monsoon,' Gopal  said.  After assessing historical data, the IPCC in its fourth assessment report in  2007 suggested that 'warming in India is likely to be above the average for  South Asia, with an increase in summer precipitation and an increase in the  frequency of intense precipitation in some parts. 'According to the IPCC the Indian monsoons are going to undergo gross  changes as a direct result of climate change with increased rainfall in the  summer monsoon, but with uneven distribution across India. Gopal predicts climate change will likely to lead to a stronger but more  variable monsoon until 2100.  Thereafter, with the melting of the Greenland  ice sheet and its effects on temperatures in the North Atlantic, and in turn,  the pattern of the North Atlantic Ocean circulation, the grip on the monsoon  will weaken. 'What is imminent and looming large are the dire consequences of a climate- changed monsoon,' Gopal said. Close to two-thirds of humanity live within regions influenced by the Asian  monsoon and depend on the water that it brings to support agriculture, and  supply potable water. The Indian subcontinent lies close to the centre of the monsoonal region, and  despite a gradual shift away from agriculture, India is still largely an agrarian  state with agriculture accounting for a third of its Gross Domestic Product.   Only about 40 percent of the land is irrigated - leaving farmers exposed to  the vagaries of monsoons. India’s farming is focused on feeding domestic demand and follows the  country’s long-held policy of maintaining food self-sufficiency. 