Recession in petroleum-rich Middle Eastern countries is causing thousands of  workers to return to their homes in southern Kerala triggering fears of a  negative impact on the local economy. In the United Arab Emirates (UAE) alone construction companies have halted  or put on hold projects worth 582 billion dollars with no word on when work  may resume. Adding to the problem is a decision made by Kuwait to deport roughly  100,000 expatriates for having irregular documentation. With some 2. 1 million workers in the Middle East, administrators in Kerala  have reason to fear that a sudden exodus may upset the state’s economy,  which has become heavily dependent on remittances over three decades. In 2008 non-resident Indians sent home 32 billion dollars making India a  major beneficiary of migrant remittances.  That figure represents three times  the amount of foreign direct investment (FDI) that India receives. Sheela Thomas, principal secretary to the chief minister and head of the  Department of Non-Resident Keralities Affairs (NORKA), told IPS that the  state government is closely monitoring the reverse migration.  'There is no  room for panic or frenzy.  We are in touch with various agencies in the Gulf to  assess the predicament people are facing there. 'According to Peter Alphons, a Kuwait-based Indian businessman, thousands  of Indians will lose their jobs if the government there implements deportation  orders.  Keralites form the single largest expatriate community in the  Sheikhdom - about 580,000 in the total population of 3. 5 million. 'Where Gulf rulers once depended on foreign workers to convert their petro- dollars into development, today they are not too happy with the large  numbers of expatriates in their midst and see the global recession as an  excuse to send back workers,' Alphons said.  'The six member Gulf  Cooperation Council (GCC) has been worried over the demographic  imbalance caused by their preponderance in countries like U. A. E, Kuwait,  Saudi Arabia, Qatar,' he added. S. M.  Najeeb, general manager of NORKA, has admitted that reverse migration,  which started from Dubai following a halt of construction work there, is now  increasing rapidly.  'It is due to various reasons such as job loss, delay in  salary, high cost of living conditions and restrictions on family visas. 'NORKA has decided to start schools to cope with the reported situation of  massive reverse migration of Kerala students from Indian-run schools in the  Middle East. 'Hundreds of students have already obtained school transfer certificates from  Kuwaiti schools alone, while the picture is not different in the UAE,' said  Thomas Chandy, a worker in Kuwait. Recruiting agencies confirmed that hundreds of job visas were cancelled from  across the Middle East.  Especially affected is the Muslim dominated district of  Malappuram where 71 percent of the families have either an emigrant or a  returnee. Overseas Development and Promotion Consultants Limited, which recruits  Keralities for overseas jobs and has 60 enlisted recruiters in different  countries, stated that a recruitment fall has occurred due to recession in  Middle East. M. C. A.  Nazer, bureau chief in the Gulf for the Malayalam daily ‘Madhyamam’,  told IPS over telephone that 30,000 visas had been cancelled in Dubai within  the last three months.  'We do not know the exact numbers of Keralities  whose visas were terminated following recession.  More than 1,000 affected  people, including Indians, are residing in camps in Dubai alone. 'According to B.  Soman, an engineer in a French consultant organisation,  petroleum and power are the only sectors that are safe.  'In these sectors,  there is no fear of job termination.  But other sectors such as health, basic  retail and food, as well as essential services are partially affected, he said  speaking from Hujira in UAE. 'A study by the Thiruvananthapuram-based Centre for Development Study  (CDS) shows that the migration tendency of Keralites has remained stationary  since 2003, while the number of NRKs per hundred households dropped from  39. 7 to 36. 2 during 2003-07. The study indicated the era of large-scale emigration from Kerala was  generally over. Prof.  Irudaya Rajan, an expert on international migration at the Centre for  Developing Societies (CDS) here said there was little evidence to show that the  economy had slowed down as a result of layoffs and retrenchments in the  Gulf. He observed that all return migration is not necessarily related to recession  and that Keralites abroad are good Samaritans and operate informal networks  to help relatives and friends to find new jobs and stay employed. Banking officials are however sceptical as to how long the remittance boom  will continue. Right now the state has 6. 3 billion dollars worth of non-resident deposits.  Of  these 56 percent flowed in from Gulf region.  A significant dip in remittances,  coupled with an exodus of expatriates, could spell trouble for Kerala’s  economy. 'Further deterioration in the global crisis can have a bearing on the inflow of  NRI funds in the days to come, and some slowdown in remittances due to the  global financial crisis and associated contraction cannot be ruled out,'  according to the Reserve Bank of India. Commenting on the banking system in the Gulf, K. N.  Radhakrishnan, a bank  official in Abu Dhabi said: 'Many of the jobs are in the Small and Medium  Enterprises (SME) sector and if the banks there can intervene to stabilise the  situation many jobs can be saved - but this is not happening. 'Following reports of a spurt in the number of labourers returning, the state  government has set up a two million dollar welfare fund besides creating a 20  million dollar package that could help those interested in starting new  ventures at home. Meanwhile the central Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs has initiated  bilateral talks to protect migrant workers.  'The government is aware that  some employers are retaining passports and do not renew visas in time,  turning the workers into illegal immigrants.  We are holding talks on the  issue,' minister Vayalar Ravi said.  