UNITED NATIONS, Feb 26 (IPS)  - Natural disasters in Asian and Pacific nations cost almost 60 billion dollars and killed 6,000 people in 2014. There were 119 ‘disaster events' recorded in the Asia-Pacific last year, including cyclones, storms, floods, landslides and earthquakes. The most damaging single event was a river basin flood in India in September that killed 1,281 people and caused 16 billion dollars in damages, according to a report from the U. N. 's Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific (ESCAP). ‘Disasters in Asia and the Pacific: 2014 Year in Review' said the 6,050 people killed in Asia-Pacific natural disasters was well down on the 18,744 recorded in the region in 2013. Almost 80 million people were affected by Asia-Pacific natural disasters last year, and a total of 59. 6 billion dollars in economic loss was wreaked on the region. Tropical Cyclone Hudhud caused 11 billion dollars in damage in India in October; the Ludian earthquake in China killed 617 and left six billion dollars in damage behind in August; landslides in Nepal killed 229; while 75 deaths and 5. 2 billion dollars in damage resulted from Japanese tropical cyclones Lingling and Kajiki. Floods, however, were the most damaging natural events, causing 3,559 deaths and 26. 8 billion dollars in damage. ESCAP warns that the Asia-Pacific was "found largely unprepared in its response to cross-border floods and landslides," and urged countries to implement better response strategies in future. "Such disasters, which may very well be on the rise because of climate change, require improved regional information exchanges and the joint coordination of operations for effective early warning and evacuations," ESCAP said in a statement. " calls for strengthened regional cooperation to address cross-border disasters. "The report makes several recommendations of more efficient early warning systems to give time for communities to prepare for, or flee from, impending natural disasters. "One important lesson from 2014 is that end-to-end early warning systems save lives," said Shamika Sirimanne, ESCAP Director of Information and Communications Technology and Disaster Risk Reduction. "The successful preparation  lies not only in the ability to predict the movement and intensity of storms, but also the capacity to engage and mobilize vulnerable communities in disaster preparedness. "The Asia-Pacific endured 119 of the world's natural disasters in 2014, more than half of the 226 recorded worldwide. While figures are a decrease from 2013, where 155 natural disasters caused US$63billion and affected 85 billion people, ESCAP urged nations to craft better strategies to respond to such events. The report made particular note of drought in the region.  While drought in the Asia-Pacific killed only 180 people in 2014, and caused 18 million dollars in damage, it affected 31. 5 million people – more than any other disaster type – and the report says this figure may even be underestimated. ESCAP warned many Asia-Pacific nations do not have the information-gathering capacity to mitigate such drought events, leading to an inability to find extra water sources. The report has called on nations to pay attention to "slow-onset disasters" like drought, noting that an ESCAP programme for monitoring drought conditions is currently being trialled in six countries. The U. N.  World Conference on Disaster Risk Reduction will be held in Sendai, Japan from Mar.  14 to 18. 