Many civil society organisations are staying on in Sardinia island in support of a  region severely affected by the economic crisis, after the G8 leaders summit was  moved from there to the city of L'Aquila. Italian Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi decided to move the G8 meeting to  L'Aquila, north-east of Rome, after a major earthquake almost destroyed the  city and surroundings in April, killing 300 people.  The government explained  the decision as 'an act of solidarity, and attention to the region's population. 'But 17 national, international and regional NGOs that had begun work with  the people of Sardinia decided they would not walk out on the region.  'We  had started to work with the local communities on our joint proposals to the  G8 when the decision was taken,' says Raffaella Bolini of the human rights  organisation Arci.  'And we decided to maintain our activities there,  particularly in the mining areas of Sulcis Iglesiente and Maedio Campidano. ' According to organisers of an alternative GSott8 (G Underground) summit,  Sardinia and areas around are a metaphor for challenges arising from climate  change and the financial crisis.  Sulcis region in southern Sardinia has gone through years of over- exploitation of its mineral and natural resources, that have now run dry.  Sardinia was long the most important mining region of Italy for lead, zinc,  copper and other metals.  The decline of their economic value, which experts  see as a consequence of changes in mining activities in less developed  countries, led to an abandonment of workers in many areas of the island.  'The last mine of the Sulcis region was closed in 1994,' trade unionist Luigi  Camposano told IPS.  'Workers who have been risking their lives in such hard  and insane places lying down every day in 80cm high corridors, have suffered.   Because with the work, they have lost their dignity. 'Sardinia is isolated, there are few productive factories, poverty is growing,  the future of its inhabitants is not sustainable,' Campisano said.  'Its situation  is very similar to that of developing countries that are struggling to build their  future. 'Economic difficulties faced by the companies that owned the mines, and a  lack of effective environmental policy hampered restoration of the mine  areas. The unemployment rate is very high in the region.  According to trade unions,  35,000 former workers are unemployed on an island with a population of  135,000, and 6,000 are on short contracts.  Another 15,000 are expected to  lose their jobs in the near future.  Only 2,500 have been given unemployment  benefits. According to GSott8 organisers, almost every family in Sardinia is affected by  the crisis.  The island is suffering like much of the world.  The International  Labour Organisation (ILO) has estimated that about 200 million jobs have  been lost worldwide due to the economic crisis, putting millions of people  into extreme poverty. 'Neither G8 nor G20 can provide an effective response to this global crisis,'  Bolini told IPS.  'They do not represent world power, but only great economies  in crisis.  The G192 and every local community must be included in the  decision-making process, and they can offer concrete contributions from  below to deal with the emergency. 'The environment is another victim of the crisis in Sardinia.  Contamination  from abandoned mines has been worsened by semi-arid conditions with long  periods of drought and heat, and a scarcity of shallow groundwater and  vegetable cover.  Sardinia is in some respects not very different from Nigeria, says Nnimmo  Bassey, director of Environmental Rights Action (ERA), a Nigerian organisation  working to limit the environmental impact of oil extraction in the Niger Delta. 'The major challenge for the Nigerian state today is related to the collapse of  crude oil revenue from an unprecedented 150 dollars a barrel to below 40  dollars,' he said.  'Nigeria produces two million barrels a day, but crude oil,  and the related problems of degradation and workers' rights abuses, has  already caused Nigeria enough problems. 'According to Bassey, Nigeria should begin to look at alternative sources of  revenue generation.  'What ERA proposes is to keep the oil under the ground;  the world will move to alternative energy sources in the next few years, so  there is no future in crude oil as the major revenue earner.  We ask Nigeria to  not make any new oil block concessions. '  