MEXICO CITY, Apr 18 (IPS)  - Latin America is making heavy weather of setting targets for greenhouse gas emissions reduction, which all countries must present ahead of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) conference later this year. Climate change is causing violent storms, prolonged droughts and temperature extremes.  In August 2014, at the height of summer, a hailstorm turned the yard white in this house in the south of Mexico City.  Credit: Emilio Godoy/IPSShortfalls in the national mechanisms for funding these voluntary action plans for adapting to climate change and mitigating or reducing polluting emissions are largely responsible for holding up the process. By Mar.  31, the first deadline for registering Intended Nationally Determined Contributions (INDC), only Mexico had done this.  In the rest of the world, Switzerland, the European Union as a bloc, Norway, the United States, Gabon and Russia, in that order, had also filed their plans. "The time taken by international negotiations and the debate over who is responsible for climate change should not be an excuse" for Latin American countries "not to make progress with risk prevention" in regard to climate change, said María Marta di Paola, a researcher with the Fundación Ambiente y Recursos Naturales (FARN), an Argentine NGO. Di Paola criticised the "marginal role" assigned to climate change by public policies in Argentina, which are merely "reactive in nature," kicking in only when flooding or droughts occur as a result of the phenomenon, she told Tierramérica. Brazil , the region's foremost producer of greenhouse gases responsible for global warming, emits nearly 1. 5 billion tonnes a year of carbon dioxide into the atmosphere.  Mexico follows, with 608 million tonnes a year, and then Venezuela with 401 million tonnes. Argentina emits 180 million tonnes of carbon dioxide a year, Colombia 75 million tonnes and Chile 72 million tonnes. The main sources of carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gas emissions in the region are deforestation due to change of land use, farming, energy generation and fuel use. The region's position at international forums is that responsibility for climate change is common but differentiated, and Latin America is particularly vulnerable to this phenomenon, experiencing intense storms, devastating drought, wide temperature oscillations, a rise in sea levels and the melting of Andean glaciers, with high human, social and economic costs. In Mexico's INDC the country committed itself to a 25 percent reduction in total emissions by 2030, compared to its 2013 emissions as the baseline.  It proposes to do this by achieving a 22 percent reduction in greenhouse gases and a 51 percent reduction in black carbon (inorganic carbon in soot) produced from diesel-fuelled transport vehicles and fuel oil fired electricity generation. The climate action plan includes having carbon dioxide emissions peak in 2026.  According to the document, it would be possible to cut emissions by 40 percent by 2030 if additional finance and technology transfer were made available as part of a global agreement. The main sectors involved are energy, industrial processes and final fuel consumption, agriculture, waste products, land use change and forests, but no details are given and there is no road map for the fulfilment of the targets. 
"The key to their achievement lies in concrete mechanisms: where the funding will come from, inter-governmental coordination, and overcoming the lack of local technical capabilities," said Javier Garduño of the Mexican office of the Institute for Transportation and Development Policy, an NGO. For instance, he told Tierramérica, "in transport, there is no legal framework to align mobility with sustainability. "At the 19th Conference of the Parties (COP 19) to the UNFCCC, held in Warsaw in 2013, it was decided that each state party would have until October 2015 to submit their INDC, which will be analysed at COP 21, due to be held in Paris in December. Ahead of the climate conference, the UNFCCC will write a report on the voluntary commitments undertaken, calculate whether they will be sufficient to reduce emissions to the levels proposed by climate experts, and suggest how to incorporate them into a new binding global treaty on climate change, to be approved in Paris for entry into force in 2020. Research from the NewClimate Institute for Climate Policy and Global Sustainability, based in Germany, for the UNFCCC and the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) found that of the 13 Latin American and Caribbean countries accounted for in the results, 33 percent have initiated a national discussion, the first stage of preparing their INDC. Another 25 percent of countries have proceeded to the technical design of their plans and 17 percent are conducting political debate, while nearly 17 percent have not yet begun to prepare the measures and eight percent have completed internal debates. Latin American countries identified, among the challenges they face in the preparation of their INDC, limited expertise for the assessment of technical options, lack of certainty on what to include, and the short timeframe available for the process. They also reported lack of coordination and of understanding (e. g.  between ministries); lack of agreement on priority mitigation options; difficulty with engaging relevant stakeholders; lack of internal agreement on desired ambition level; and conflict with other political priorities. Except for Chile and Mexico, countries repeatedly complained of lack of consultation and of inclusion of civil society in the plans. "Colombia's actions should be transparent, inclusive and participatory," Milena Bernal, a researcher with the Colombian NGO Asociación Ambiente y Sociedad (Environment and Society Association), told Tierramérica. This is particularly necessary, in her view, "when determining specific contributions from the forestry sector, land use, energy generation, and management of financial resources that may be received by the country. "Most Latin American countries have legislation on climate change, or related to it.  Mexico passed laws in 2012 stipulating emissions reduction of 30 percent by 2020 and 50 percent by 2050, as well as creating the Special Programme on Climate Change. Argentina is preparing its Third Communication on Climate Change, an inventory of emissions to present to UNFCCC, and since 2011 the National Strategy on Climate Change. Chile has had a national plan for adaptation to climate change since December, with specific policies for the forestry, agriculture and livestock sector; biodiversity; fisheries and aquaculture; health; infrastructure; cities; tourism; energy; and water resources. Colombia is drawing up its National Climate Change Policy, which is likely to include its INDC, according to experts. "In Argentina there are laws linked to the subject, such as the laws on native forests, glaciers and renewable energy, but they are poorly enforced and the budgets for the different programmes are declining," di Paola said. In Bernal's view, mechanisms need to be defined for the achievement of the INDC commitments made this year. "It is to be hoped that ambitious contributions will be put forward, in the sense of defining not only the percentages of emissions reductions, but also the actions to be taken with the resources available, and additional actions that could be taken if there is a greater flow of finance from international funding sources," she said. This story was originally published by Latin American newspapers that are part of the Tierramérica network. Edited by Estrella Gutiérrez/Translated by Valerie Dee