STOCKHOLM, Apr 30 (IPS)  - The Swedish government is in the process of pondering an important decision -- whether to sell the vast lignite reserves of the state-owned Vattenfall energy giant or ensure that they stay in the ground.  The decision will define Sweden's commitment to tackling climate change. Coal Power Plant Jaenschwalde in GermanyBraunkohlekraftwerk JaenschwaldeJust a few days ago, on Apr.  27, Vattenfall stockholders gathered for their Annual General Meeting where the issue of selling the company was high on the agenda, according to Swedish radio station Ekot. 3"We are in the middle of a process to sell," Vattenfall's executive director Magnus Hall, who hopes to reach a deal already this year, was reported as saying.  According to Hall, the Swedish government has given a clear mandate and support to Vattenfall in its plan to sell its ‘dirty' operations. ‘Vattenfall' translates into ‘waterfall' and the company's logo is an image of a sun and beautiful waves.  While it plays on this imagery to build its brand, Vattenfall is emitting huge amounts of carbon into the atmosphere every day. The company's lignite mines and power plants in Germany – including the Jänschwalde coal power plant which is Europe's fourth biggest CO2 emitter – are responsible for twice the amount of Sweden's total annual carbon emissions. The Swedish government is committed to keeping the rise in global temperature below 2℃ which, at global level, requires leaving 82 percent of fossil fuel reserves in the ground.  Through Vattenfall, the Swedish state is the owner of more than one billion tonnes of carbon. Now is the time for Sweden to assume responsibility and ensure that emissions from these unburnable reserves are never released. Over recent years, Sweden's actions have shown that it has the potential to play a leading role in transforming our economies to power the renewable future we need.  But Vattenfall's conduct – clinging on to an outdated business model – taints this picture.  Aerial view of Vattenfall's brown coal (lignite) open pit mine in Jaenschwalde, Germany.  Credit: 