UNITED NATIONS, Aug 14 (IPS)  - If there is any idea and cause for which the United Nations has been an indispensable engine of progress globally it is the cause of ending all forms of "discrimination and violence against women and girls, ensuring the realization of their equal rights and advancing their political, economic and social empowerment. SE4ALL: Global Leadership DialogueGender equality and the empowerment of women has been featured prominently in the history of the United Nations system since its inception.  The ideas, commitments and actions of the United Nations have sought to fundamentally improve the situation of women around the world, in country after country. 3Now, as we celebrate the United Nations' 70th anniversary, the U. N.  continues to be the world leader in establishing the global norms and policy standards on women's empowerment, their human rights and on establishing what we at U. N.  Women call  the Planet 50 / 50 Project on equality between women and men. Equality between men and women was enshrined in the U. N. 's founding Charter as a key principle and objective.  Just a year after, in 1946, the Commission on the Status of Women (CSW) was set up as the dedicated intergovernmental body for policy dialogue and standard setting and monitoring gender equality commitments of member states and their implementation. Since then, the Commission has played an essential role in guiding the work of the United Nations and in setting standards for all countries, from trailblazing advocacy for the full political suffrage of women and political rights to women's role in development. It also gave birth to the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women, CEDAW, adopted in 1979.  Often called the international bill of rights for women, and used as a global reference point for both governments and NGOs alike, the Convention has been ratified by 189 States so far. These governments regularly report to the CEDAW Committee which has also become a generator of normative guidance through its General Recommendations, apart from strengthening the accountability of governments. As the torch-bearer on women's rights, the U. N.  also led the way in declaring 1975 to 1985 the International Women's Decade.  During this period the U. N.  held the first three World Conferences on Women, in Mexico (1975), Copenhagen (1980) and Nairobi (1985) which advanced advocacy, activism and policy action on gender equality, women's empowerment and women's rights in multiple areas. In 1995, the U. N.  hosted the historic Fourth World Conference on Women, and adopted the Beijing Declaration and Platform for Action, one of most progressive frameworks which continues to be the leading roadmap for the achievement of gender equality and women's empowerment globally. Twenty years after its adoption, the Platform for Action remains a gold standard of international commitments on strategic objectives and actions on gender equality, women's empowerment and women's rights in 12 critical areas of concern including poverty, education, health, economy, power and decision making, ending violence against women, women's human rights, conflict and post conflict environment, media, institutional mechanisms and the girl child. Since 1995 gender equality and women's empowerment issues have permeated all intergovernmental bodies of the U. N.  system. The General Assembly, the highest and the universal membership body of the United Nations, leads the way with key normative resolutions as well as reflecting gender perspectives in areas such as agriculture, trade, financing for development, poverty eradication, disarmament and non-proliferation, and many others.  Among the MDGs, MDG 3 was specifically designed to promote gender equality and empower women apart from Goal 5 on maternal mortality. The Economic and Social Council (ECOSOC) has also been a strong champion of gender mainstreaming into all policies, programmes, areas and sectors as the mains strategy in achieving gender equality and women's empowerment. Progress achieved so far has been in part possible thanks to ECOSOC's strong mandate for mainstreaming a gender perspective and its support to the United Nations system-wide action Plan on Gender Equality and Women's Empowerment (UN-SWAP) which constitutes a unified accountability framework for and of the U. N.  to support gender equality and empowerment of women. Strongly addressing the impact of conflict on women and their role in peacebuilding, the U. N.  sent a strong signal by addressing the issue of women peace and security in the landmark Security Council resolution 1325 (2000) which asserted  the imperative of  women's empowerment in  conflict prevention, peace-making and peace building apart from ensuring their protection. This resolution was seen as a must for women as well as for lasting peace and it has since been complemented by seven additional resolutions including on Sexual Violence in Conflict.  This year as the 15th anniversary of Security Council resolution 1325 is commemorated, a Global Study and Review on its effective implementation is underway. It is expected to renew the political will and decisive action to ensure that women are equal partners and their agency and leadership is effectively engaged in conflict prevention, peace-making and peace-building. Edited by Kitty Stapp 