The financial crisis could actually boost agriculture in Latin America, Josefina  Stubbs, director of the International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD)  division for Latin America and the Caribbean tells IPS in an interview. Excerpts from the interview:IPS: What are the effects of the economic crisis on agriculture in Latin  America? Is there a risk it could increase rural poverty?Josefina Stubbs: I think the current financial crisis is an opportunity for the  rural sector, even if this sounds a little bit strange.  It does present an  opportunity because the countries, the governments, the populations, the  producers are realising more and more that in Latin America about 60  percent of the food that is consumed is by small producers.  In a country like Brazil, with a population of 189 million, family agriculture -  which is the small-scale sort of plot, managed normally by very poor people  - produces 70 percent of the food.  We are talking about a huge force; the  potential of this people is just extraordinary. The case of Brazil is really interesting.  The ministry of agrarian development  developed a system for supporting small producers, creating new access to  finance, but at the same time guaranteeing a market for them.  But even  more, they buy the food from some of these producers to be distributed in  schools and hospitals.  That's what Brazil demonstrates, that they can have  some market in the country that can get and acquire the products of small  producers to feed the rest of the country, and generate incomes for the rural  sectors.  IPS: Is Brazil an exception?JS: We are seeing another example in Guatemala.  Here international trade  agreements and international trade opportunities are also offering new  opportunities for the producers to put their products in the market.  In the last  10-15 years, based on very small producers, Guatemala has become the  largest exporter of vegetables to the U. S.  market. IPS: What is the relation between this and the financial crisis?JS: It was explained to me in very simple mathematics in Haiti, in Guatemala  and in other countries.  They say 'we have been importing an important  amount of food to feed our people'.  Buying the food in the international  markets means we have to dispense our currency, which in Latin America  means U. S.  dollars.  And they say every dollar they use to buy food outside of  the country cannot be used for all the services in the country. What I hope is that the discussions about the crisis include the issue of rural  development, and the issue of investing in small-scale agriculture as a way of  capitalising the country in terms of foreign currency but also in terms of  generating employment and food security. Now the challenge for us is how to stimulate agriculture as away of boosting  the economy of the countries, generating employment, but also as a way of  closing the gap.  The progress I mentioned before have to be combined with  production; that's the great challenge we have in front of us in the region. IPS: Is there any concern about food insecurity in Latin America? In what  countries or areas?JS: So far as you become dependent on others to feed your people, that's what  insecurity is.  I think the region is recognising that food security is important  and that we cannot be completely and fully dependent on import of food  because of the fluctuation of the international market.  Central America and the Caribbean are the regions that have suffered most in  this crisis.  When you have shortage of maize, in the case of Mexico that  means the diet is not there, but also you cannot feed the chickens, and you  have to import a lot of wheat in order to do bread. What is really amazing for me is how small farmers all across Latin America  just need the basics.  People are not sitting and waiting for the governments  to give to them, they just need the basic inputs in order for them to produce,  be organised and access the market.  People are not necessarily dependent. IPS: Are opportunities equally distributed among male and female rural  populations? Do women farmers have equal access to land, credit, salaries  and incomes?JS: In the case of Latin America almost all countries have changed the laws for  women to have equal access to land.  In Guatemala, in Honduras, in Colombia  and many other countries those laws have already put in place.  Also thanks to  the pressure of the social movements, and women's movements, Latin  America has been revisiting the land property regime in terms of giving equal  access to men and women.  It is clear that the problem is not only about having access to land.  The issue  is women do have more problems in getting a loan from the banks.  They do  not have equal access to credit and to agricultural inputs - seeds, fertilisers -  this is where the problem lies at the moment. We're making sure that the community organisations that we work with  include women, and we work directly with women's organisations to monitor  if our project is really helping women's access to inputs. IPS: Where is monitoring needed particularly? JS: One area where I feel we are still really behind is women's access to  market.  Once they go to producers organisations, once they want to link the  products with the companies that buy the products, then there is a gap.   Because they do not have the information, the technology, the contacts, they  normally don't go to the meetings with foreign buyers. Whenever you see a tour to present a product you see mostly men.  That is  partially because the domestic burden hasn't been redistributed, so when  there's a trip to Italy to present the chocolate that this association is  producing it is normally the men who come.  And that goes against the  women in the sense that they do not have the exposure opportunity that men  are having.  