With its long, dry summers, Lebanon's diminishing woodlands are devastated by  wild fires every year - and this year is no exception. Last week, more than 30 fires were started at the same time in the Bekaa  valley, pointing to arson.  A source working as part of the fire fighting team in  Lebanon, who chose to remain anonymous, showed IPS charred Pepsi cans  smelling of oil and gas connected to a fuse, indicating that the blazes were  purposely set.  'We have noticed in the last few years that forest fires are starting  simultaneously, which rarely occurs in nature,' said the official.  'We believe  that such fires are intentional and set by feuding political factions in order to  make the party heading the civil defence department in a certain area look  incompetent. ' The official added that although the identity of the criminals in  the Bekaa fires has been discovered, they have yet to be arrested because of  political interference.  General Darwich Hobeika, director of the Lebanese Civil Defence, says the  frequency of fires has increased tremendously over recent years.  The civil  defence now fights an average of 20,000 fires a year, Hobeika said.  This  figure was only 7,000 in 1994. In October 2007, a massive blaze destroyed large areas of forests across  Lebanon, injuring dozens of people and leading to the death of one woman.   'More than 3,700 hectares of forest and agricultural land were lost that year,  which was one of the worst in the history of Lebanon, especially when  compared to the previous year and considering that the annual loss is usually  1,600 hectares,' says Fadi Bou Ali from the Association for Forest  Development and Conservation (AFDC).  Lebanon's forests currently cover 136,000 hectares, representing 13 percent  of the country's total surface.  'We have noticed that most fires usually occur  in certain specific areas that we've identified with our fire risk map.  Mount  Lebanon is one of the areas that is most prone to forest fires, it is followed by  the northern Akkar and southern Jezzine regions, where woods are located,'  says Bou Ali.  Bou Ali attributes the rise in wild fires in Lebanon to global warming, which  prolongs the dry summer season and currently lasts from June to October.   However, he points out that certain human practices often worsen the  problem.   'Woods are not maintained and cleaned any more due to the migration of the  rural population,' Bou Ali says.  'After the long summer, vegetation dries up in  autumn, which is also a season of strong dry winds, making it easier for  woods to flare up.  In addition, many municipalities contribute to the spread  of fires by leaving cleared shrubbery from the roads on the roadside, which  constitutes an excellent source of fuel for out of control fires. '  Furthermore, farmers and landowners clear their fields of dry grass by setting  it on fire, a situation that can turn into an ecological disaster if the fires go  out of control.  Bou Ali says many of the fires are caused by such negligence,  but that some are purposely set, although not necessarily with political  motivations.     'In certain rural areas, properties are delineated by natural obstacles, such as  forests, which are often partly burnt down by owners to increase the size of  their property,' says Hobeika.   Although Lebanese law prohibits the starting of any fire from June to October  unless it is at a distance of 500 metres from woodlands, Bou Ali says the law  is rarely enforced.  Bou Ali warns of more fires to come as Lebanon enters its hottest season.   Hobeika worries about the ability of the civil defence to put out the massive  blazes without proper fire-fighting equipment.  'The civil defence relies on  700 outdated machines, including fire trucks and tractors, while it actually  needs triple the amount of modern equipment to be effective,' Hobeika says.   