Seven German nuclear plants have failed to generate any electricity this month  due to technical breakdowns.  They have about half the production capacity of  Germany's 17 nuclear reactors, but Germany did not suffer any power shortages. The plants have between them a 9,000 megawatt (MW) capacity, but Germany  generates more electricity than it consumes, and has been exporting some of  the surplus to France, which is heavily dependent on nuclear power. Early this month, three plants shut down automatically due to failures in their  transformers.  The other four have been out of service for months, and are  undergoing expensive repairs. The breakdowns come at a time when the planned phasing out of nuclear  power is under attack.  In 2002, the coalition government of the Social  Democratic Party (SPD) and the Greens decided that all nuclear reactors  would be phased out by 2021.  At the same time, the government launched a massive investment  programme in renewable energy, making Germany the leading country in  Europe in use of the sun and wind as energy sources. According to official figures, Germany generates 15 percent of the electricity  it consumes from renewable sources.  A law passed in 2008 sets a target of  generating at least 30 percent of electricity through renewables by 2020. Additionally, on Jul.  13, a group of large German companies announced a  joint investment of 400 billion euros (560 billion dollars) in setting up solar  thermal plants in the Sahara, to generate at least 15 percent of all electricity  needed in Europe by the year 2020. But Chancellor Angela Merkel announced Jul.  1 that she would reverse the  phasing out of nuclear power if her Christian Democratic Party wins the  general election in September, and can form a coalition with the right-wing  Liberal Democratic Party.  Merkel presently rules in coalition with the SPD. 'Nuclear power remains an indispensable component of the German energy  mix,' Merkel told the annual meeting of Atomforum, a group representing the  four major German electricity providers, all operators of nuclear power plants. But now the technical difficulties faced by nuclear power plants and the near  redundancy of many appear to be strengthening the case for phasing them  out.  'We do not need nuclear power,' environment minister Sigmar Gabriel,  leading member of the SPD, and a strong party campaigner against nuclear  power, said at a press conference Jul.  27.  Gabriel urged Merkel to 'reconsider  her position towards this dangerous anachronistic technology. 'The figures provided by the German electricity national grid confirm Gabriel's  position.  RWE and Vatenfall, two of the four electricity providers, and which  run the national grid, say electricity supply even without the seven reactors  out of service meets the base load demand. 'Shortage of electricity in Germany? Not today, and not tomorrow,' a  spokesperson of Vatenfall told IPS. According to official figures, Germany's nuclear power reactors generate 22  percent of the country's electricity.  Coal-fuelled generators produce 46  percent, and natural gas 12 percent.  Oil and other sources generate five  percent.  Renewables, which include the sun, wind, biomass and hydroelectric  power plants generate 15 percent. Clotilde Levillain, director of the French national grid RTE has said that on Jul.   23 alone France imported about 4,500 MW from Germany, Spain, and Britain.   This amounts to the output from five average French nuclear reactors. France generates 80 percent of its electricity from 58 nuclear power plants,  and is most dependent on nuclear energy.  Levillain said the deficit in  production was due to delays in routine maintenance because of strikes, and  due to additional demand as a result of above average temperatures. 'These weeks have been characterised by temperatures two to five degrees  Celsius above the average,' Levillain said at a press conference in Paris.  'This  increase of temperature represents an increase of electricity consumption of  some 400 MW per day. 'In recent years, France has been forced to shut down several of its nuclear  reactors during the hottest period of the summer.  The high temperature of  river waters reduces their cooling effect at the nuclear power plants located  mostly along the rivers Seine, Loire, Rhone, Moselle, Meuse, Vienne, Tarn, and  Rhine. This frailty of nuclear energy shows the absurdity of the claim that it might  be a solution to global warming, opponents say.  'As the climate warms up,  nuclear power plants are less able to deliver,' says Stephane Lhomme,  spokesperson for the French anti-nuclear network Sortire du nuclear (Phase  out nuclear power). 'Global warming is showing the limits of nuclear power plants, and nuclear  power is destroying our environment,' Lhomme told IPS.  The French government has partially derogated environment laws aimed at  protecting river fauna and flora in order to allow nuclear power plants to  drain excessively hot water into the rivers during the summer.  Water at  temperatures above 28 degrees Celsius can cause the death of fish and other  animals and plants in the rivers.  