Serge Latouche, professor emeritus of economic science at the University of  Paris-Sud, is one of the main proponents of 'the society of de-growth'. He calls for 'abandoning the objective of growth for growth's sake, an insane  objective, with disastrous consequences for the environment. ' The need for a  'de-growth' society stems from the certainty, he says, that the earth's  resources and natural cycles cannot sustain the economic growth which is the  essence of capitalism and modernity.  In place of the current dominant system, Latouche argues for 'a society of  assumed sobriety; to work less in order to live better lives, to consume less  products but of better quality, to produce less waste and recycle more. 'The new society would mean 'recuperating a sense of measure and a  sustainable ecological footprint,' Latouche says, 'and finding happiness in  living together with others rather than in the frantic accumulation of  gadgets. 'Author of many books and articles on Western rationality, the myth of  progress, colonialism and post-development, Serge Latouche describes the  main principles of the de-growth society in his books 'Le Pari de la  Décroissance'(The Bet of De-Growth) and 'Petit Traité de la Décroissance  Sereine' (Small Treaty of Peaceful De-Growth) published in 2006 and 2007.  Serge Latouche spoke to IPS correspondent Claudia Ciobanu about de-growth  society.  IPS: What are the features of the society of de-growth, and are any practices  in the world today compatible with this vision?Serge Latouche: De-growth does not mean negative growth.  Negative growth  is a self-contradictory expression, which just proves the domination of the  collective imagination by the idea of growth. On the other hand, de-growth is not the alternative to growth, but rather, a  matrix of alternatives which would open up the space for human creativity  again, once the cast of economic totalitarianism is removed.  The de-growth  society would not be the same in Texas and in the Chiapas, in Senegal and in  Portugal.  De-growth would open up anew the human adventure to the  plurality of its possible destinies.  Principles of de-growth can already be found in theoretical thought and in  practical efforts in both the global North and the South.  For example, the  attempt to create an autonomous region by the neo-Zapatistas in Chiapas;  and many South American experiences, indigenous or others, such as in  Ecuador, which has just introduced in its constitution the objective of Sumak  Kausai (harmonious life). All sorts of initiatives promoting de-growth and solidarity are starting to  spread in the global North too: AMAP (The Associations for the Preservation  of Peasant Agriculture in France, that promote direct links between producers  and consumers, and organic agriculture), self-production according to the  example of PADES (the Programme for Self-Production and Social  Development, developed in France to help individuals and communities  produce goods for themselves and others, eliminating monetary  interchanges). The movement of Transition Towns started in Ireland and spreading in  England could be a form of production from below which closest resembles a  society of de-growth.  These towns are seeking firstly energy self-sufficiency  in the face of depleting resources and, more generally, promote the principle  of community resilience. IPS: What would be the role of markets in the de-growth society?SL: The capitalist system is a market economy, but markets are not an  institution which belongs exclusively to capitalism.  It is important to  distinguish between the Market and markets.  The latter do not obey the law  of perfect competition, and that is for the best.  They always incorporate  elements of the culture of the gift, which the de-growth society is trying to  rediscover.  They involve living in communion with the others, developing a  human relationship between the buyer and the seller.  IPS: What strategies could the global South pursue in order to eliminate  poverty in a different way than the North has, at the expense of the  environment and producing poverty in the South?SL: For African countries, decreasing the ecological footprint and the GDP are  neither necessary nor desirable.  But from this we must not conclude that a  society of growth must be built there. Firstly, it is clear that de-growth in the North is a precondition for opening  up of alternatives for the South.  As long as Ethiopia and Somalia are forced,  during the worst food shortage, to export feed for our domestic animals, as  long as we fatten our cattle with soya obtained after destroying the  Amazonian forest, we are asphyxiating any attempt at real autonomy in the  South. To dare de-growth in the South means to launch a virtuous cycle made up of  breaking economic and cultural dependency on the North; reconnecting with  a historical line interrupted by colonisation; reintroducing specific products  which have been abandoned or forgotten as well as 'anti-economic' values  linked to the past of those countries; recuperating traditional techniques and  knowhow.  These are to be combined with other principles, valid worldwide: re- conceptualising what we understand by poverty, scarcity and development for  instance; restructuring society and the economy; restoring non-industrial  practices, especially in agriculture; redistributing; re-localising; reusing;  recycling. IPS: The de-growth society involves a radical change in human  consciousness.  How is this radical change going to come about? Can it  happen in time?SL: It is difficult to break out of this addiction to growth especially because it  is in the interest of the 'dealers' – the multinational corporations and the  political powers serving them - to keep us enslaved. Alternative experiences and dissident groups - such as cooperatives,  syndicates, the associations for the preservation of peasant agriculture,  certain NGOs, local exchange systems, networks for knowledge exchange -  represent pedagogical laboratories for the creation of 'the new human being'  demanded by the new society.  They represent popular universities which can  foster resistance and help decolonise the imaginary. Certainly, we do not have much time, but the turn of events can help  accelerate the transformation.  The ecological crisis together with the financial  and economic crisis we are experiencing can constitute a salutary shock.  IPS: Can conventional political actors play a role in this transformation?SL: All governments are, whether they want it or not, functionaries of  capitalism.  In the best of cases, the governments can at most slow down or  smoothen processes over which they do not have control any more. We consider the process of self-transformation of society and of citizens  more important than electoral politics.  Even so, the recent relative electoral  success of French and Belgian ecologists, who have adopted some of the de- growth agenda, seems like a positive sign.   