Southern Kerala state is known for the lush expanses of cardamom, pepper, tea  and rubber that grow on its misty hills, and the bountiful catches of fish on a  coastline punctuated by lagoons and backwaters.  But a cloud hovers over this  picture of plenty - a free trade deal with the Association of Southeast Asian  Nations (ASEAN) bloc. With the Indo-ASEAN Free Trade Agreement (FTA) now slated to become  operative in Jan.  2010, agricultural experts, fishermen’s representatives,  trade union leaders and Kerala’s Marxist Chief Minister V. S.  Achuthanandan  have been at pains to convince the pro-reform central government of Prime  Minister Manmohan Singh that the deal should be postponed or scuttled. India is a dialogue partner at ASEAN - which comprises Brunei, Cambodia,  Indonesia, Laos, Malaysia, Myanmar, the Philippines, Singapore, Thailand and  Vietnam.  ASEAN already has FTAs with three other dialogue partners - China,  Japan and South Korea. 'The centre has bypassed its constitutional duty to take Kerala and other  states into confidence before deciding to go ahead with this deal,'  Achuthanandan told IPS soon after a meeting with Singh in the national  capital this week to discuss the issue.  'We are yet to see a copy of the  proposed pact which, if signed, will undoubtedly affect the fisheries and  plantation sectors. 'It does not help that Kerala - a state of 32 million people, with high human  development indices - is ruled by the Communist Party of India - Marxist  (CPI-M), which is bitterly opposed to the pro-liberalisation polices of Singh’s  Congress party-led government. Supporters of the deal within the central government argue that Indo-ASEAN  trade is an unstoppable process that has seen a rise in levels from 6. 93  billion dollars per annum to 39. 4 billion dollars between 2000 and 2008. The FTA, these supporters say, will see a phased reduction in tariffs to zero  on over 4,000 goods, out of the 5,000 that are currently under trade.  There  would also be a negative list to protect certain items until a level playing field  is achieved. 'A free trade agreement with the ASEAN is an international political  commitment and is also part of the ‘Look-East’ policy,' Singh reportedly told  his cabinet colleagues when the issue came up for discussion last week.  He  pointed to the fact that Australia, China, Japan, New Zealand and South Korea  have already signed FTAs with ASEAN and said India could not be seen to be  lagging behind. According to a cabinet minister who attended the discussions, India would -  through the FTA - gain access to machinery, steel products, chemicals and  synthetic textiles and also allow Indian business opportunities in ASEAN  countries and open up the bloc’s services sector. The central government’s logic is that ASEAN with 600 million people -  against India’s billion plus - presents a substantial opportunity for Indian  exporters and businessmen. Also with multilateral trade agreements under the World Trade Organisation  (WTO) having hit an impasse there is a new emphasis on bilateral and  regional trade agreements.  As for competition there is a need to improve  productivity and quality as India gradually integrates into the global market. 'Such arguments are all very well but the ground realities are very different,'  says Thomas Verghese, a distinguished agricultural scientist and chairman of  the Kerala State Prices Board.  'There are huge differences in productivity,  labour costs and inputs in the participating countries which cannot be easily  bridged. 'Speaking with IPS over telephone from Thiruvananthapuram, Kerala’s capital,  Verghese said while the productivity of pepper is 380 kilograms per hectare  in India it is 1,000 kilograms per hectare in Vietnam and 3,000 kilograms per  hectare in Indonesia.  'If this FTA goes through, pepper may cease to be  produced in Kerala, the land where it originated. 'Verghese said that even within India there existed issues that were specific to  Kerala - such as the high wages of labour in the state at six dollars per day,  or the special importance of crops such as coconut for the local economy and  for food security. 'Kerala’s farmers already have the bitter experience of past free trade  agreements, such as the South Asia Free Trade Agreement (SAFTA) signed in  2006, which saw the state flooded with cheap Sri Lankan coconuts.  Also the  import of cheap palm oil from Malaysia and Indonesia has seriously affected  coconut cultivation,' Verghese said. According to Verghese Kerala’s four million coconut farmers stand to be truly  ruined by the Indo-ASEAN FTA because it will allow the import of coconut oil  from the Philippines - a major producer which enjoys significantly lower  costs of production. But, Verghese said the sector that is going to be hit worst is fisheries -  particularly artisanal fishing which will be unable to compete with the factory  fishing carried out by such countries as Thailand.  'Some two million  fishermen and their families are at risk in Kerala alone,' he said. In fact, sensing the danger, the National Fish Workers Forum (NFF) and the  Kerala Free Fish Workers Federation (KSMTF) are leading a nation-wide  programme of agitation that is being planned to halt the trade deal with  ASEAN. 'Cheap imports of fish will threaten the livelihood of fish workers.  The pact  will enable the dumping of 177 species of fish in the Indian market,' said T.   Peter, president of the KSMTF.  'We are confident of winning popular support  from consumers in India because the fresh catches of anchovy, lobster, crab,  sardine, mackerel, shark, shrimp and squid they are used to will soon be  replaced by refrigerated imports. 'Peter said that at a time of deep financial and agrarian crisis - when many  countries are rejecting free trade policies - the Singh government’s argument  that India will be isolated in the world economy if it does not sign this FTA  was hard to swallow.  'We do not believe that adequate scrutiny of this FTA  has been done - agriculture and fisheries groups in Kerala and other states  have certainly not been consulted. ''As far as fisheries are concerned, recent years have seen fish stocks depleted  due to over fishing by trawlers and foreign vessels, and falling prices forcing  many fishermen in Kerala to find other means of livelihood,' Peter said.   'Further liberalisation of fisheries in the name of increasing trade will only  deepen the problems of the fishing community. 'The biggest threats come from Thailand, the world’s largest exporter of  farmed shrimp, and Vietnam, the world’s eighth largest seafood exporter. Afsar Jafri from Focus on the Global South, a regional research and campaign  group that monitors trade liberalisation initiatives in Asia, said Malaysia’s  powerful palm oil industry has been lobbying hard for the FTA.  'Malaysia is  the world’s largest producer of this vegetable oil and its duty free import into  the Indian market will adversely impact crops like tea, coffee, coconut, rubber  and pepper farmers. 'Verghese said that Kerala’s food security has already been compromised by a  massive shift from staples like paddy to cash crops with the centre providing  no support against price fluctuations. 'Even if a negative list provides protection to major cash crops, as is being  claimed by central leaders, it is only for a few years,' Varghese said.  'What is  the guarantee that crops like rubber, tea, pepper and coffee will gain in  productivity and competitiveness in that time?'