Juxtapose the word urban in front of farm and there’s bound to be a lot of head  scratching.  But in cities around the U. S.  small-scale farms and garden plots are  coming to life in unlikely places.  Abandoned city lots, and neglected yards are  being converted into vegetable gardens - as basic food literacy becomes part of  the vocabulary of city dwellers. Due to a faltering economy and numerous food scares, many U. S.  households  are asking two basic questions: ‘Where does my food come from?’ Followed  by, ‘How do we pay for it?’The recently established New Roots farm located in San Diego is part of an  unusual experiment among food activists to bring sustainable agriculture  within city limits.  Under the aegis of the International Rescue Committee  (IRC), a non-profit organisation working with refugees worldwide, the  immigrant community of City Heights has started an 'urban farm' for local  residents. Open since mid-July, the New Roots Community Farm as the property has  come to be called is a raw patch of land located on 2. 2 acres of city property  with the potential to supplement the diets of hundreds if not thousands of  low-income individuals living in greater San Diego. The so-called farm opened after nearly four years of negotiations with local  and federal agencies.  'It took us a long time to get access to this land,'  mentions Amy Lint, IRC food security coordinator, when speaking of the  effort to obtain and secure the proper permits from city planners. The founders are hoping the new farm can serve as an example of what can  be done in an urban setting.  Since, even small plots of land can be  surprisingly productive in the hands of experienced growers. Many participants are recipients of some form of federal assistance intended  for families living below or slightly above the poverty level.  'People aren’t  eating three meals a day here,' says Lint. According to Lint, the IRC sees the farm as an opportunity to enable  newcomers to survive and thrive.  The farms are helping refugees to integrate  into mainstream society and improve nutrition - along with employment  opportunities that operating a small-scale farm can provide.  The best way to  help New Farms’ members Lint contends is to help them to grow food for  themselves. Many of the members have fled political hotspots.  Driven out of their  homelands during periods of civil war and extreme violence. In some ways, the farm is a microcosm of a world the members have left  behind.  Composed of people of Burmese, Cambodian, Guatemalan, and  Somali-Bantu ancestry, among others.  A majority of New Roots members  belong to marginalised ethnic groups that lived in rural societies based on  clan and family affiliations. 'We’re farmers,' explains Hamadi Jumale, a mental-healthcare case manager  and spokesperson for the Bantu-Somali Community Organisation in San  Diego. Bilali Muya, New Roots farm manager and community advocate, offered a  brief glimpse into his personal history.  Muya’s world collapsed when civil war  broke out in Somalia in 1991.  He fled across the border into Kenya.   Eventually reuniting with his parents and made his way to a refugee camp  that brought him to America. The journey is still fresh in his memory.   'We weren’t rich, we weren’t  educated, so why did they want to kill us?' he asked when speaking of the  politically dominant Somali clans that victimised Bantu-Somali villages. Prior to the civil war the Somali-Bantu formed the backbone of Somalia’s  agricultural region producing crops in the Juba Valley.  Imported to work as  slaves in the 18th Century their presence in Somalia was a lasting legacy of  the Arab slave trade that marked them as cultural and ethnic outsiders. After a nearly decade of fighting, the U. S.  State Department recognized the  plight of the Somali-Bantu, according them refugee status.  In 1999 U. N.   officials began arranging for their transport from refugee camps in Kenya to  the U. S.  where approximately 12,000 of them have resettled. On a late summer afternoon, the sun ebbed over an arid low-rise landscape  that hardly evoked the countryside - in a part of town the tourist bureau  avoids to mention.  Planes flew overhead amid the hum of commuter traffic  filling the air with white noise. The farm is a work in progress.  Eighty10-foot by 20-foot plots have been  allocated to four immigrant groups with the remainder to be distributed  among local residents.  Presently, the garden plots are in the care of friends  and family doing what needs to be done in order to make the soil productive.   Much of the field remains to be cleared of rocks.  Still there are promising  signs of life, as new vegetation emerges on what at first appeared to be  wasteland. The soft-spoken Muya articulated what the Somali-Bantu hoped to  accomplish in City Heights.  The farm he believes gives the group a focus  regardless of their circumstances.   Linking the 400 Somali-Bantu families  living San Diego to their agricultural past and providing hope for the future.   'We are here to build our lives and the lives of our children,' he says.  With  that, Muya slipped off to the hospital to attend to his wife and newborn child. Although New Roots is a small part of the overall farming equation.  The  personal stories of the people involved in the food movement, like the Bantu- Somali, have energised food advocates to take action - proposing sweeping  reforms in the way food is grown and distributed, ranging from tax credits  for reducing carbon emissions to various farm-to-table initiatives that  provide low-income families with better access to fresh produce. The federal government is already tinkering around the edges of the food  system. According to U. S.  Department of Agriculture (USDA) statistics as of 2008, 753  farmers’ markets nationwide accepted food stamps, a 34 percent increase  over the prior year.  While the percentage of redemptions are very small when  compared to the amount of revenues actually generated at farmers’ markets.   It has increased from about 1 million dollars in 2007 to 2. 7 million dollars in  2008. In terms of actual policy reform, it also helps to have an advocate for  sustainable agriculture living at the White House.  Food activists were euphoric  when first lady Michelle Obama broke ground on her organic garden in Mar.   2009.   'We know what we are doing is being supported at the very highest  levels,' says University of California at Davis Food Systems Expert Gail  Feenstra. 