The natural conditions in Romania and Bulgaria make these countries some of  the best placed in Europe for producing wind energy.  Interest in investing in  wind power is high in both countries, but legislative ambiguity and the limited  capacity of national electricity grids are delaying the building of new wind parks. Romania has the largest wind potential in south-east Europe, according to a  study by Erste Bank last year.  Its geographical and climatic conditions could  eventually sustain an installed production capacity of 14,000 MW from wind.   Even according to more modest estimates, wind power could potentially  account for 10 percent of the energy produced in the country.   Bulgaria could have a wind power production capacity of 3,400 MW in a few  years, according to the European Bank of Reconstruction and Development  (EBRD).  Unlike Romania, Bulgaria is at the moment highly dependent on  energy imports, taking most of the fossil fuels it uses from Russia. Apart from fossils and hydropower, Bulgaria is currently making use of a  partially obsolete nuclear plant (Kozlodui), and planning to build another such  plant in the north (Belene).  Wind power could produce as much energy as  these nuclear plants.   Southern Romania and northern Bulgaria, as well as areas along the Black Sea  coast in both countries have the most favourable conditions for wind energy  production.  Among the companies interested in investing in wind power in  these countries are Italian ENEL, Spanish Ibedrola and the U. S. -based AES  Corporation.  Both countries have taken on the European Union (EU) objective of getting 20  percent of energy from renewable sources by 2020.  But given that both  Romania and Bulgaria have high hydroelectric capacities, the EU target could  be achieved on the basis of hydropower, without replacing fossil fuels with  renewables.  Even so, EU environmental legislation and the strong interest among foreign  investors in exploiting wind power have been putting pressure on national  authorities to act on promoting wind energy.  Bulgarian authorities seem to be moving faster, though Romania has more  wind power potential.  Around 200 MW of wind farms are already installed in Bulgaria, and another  200 MW is in the pipeline, says Yordan Mihaylov, managing partner at MASS  Energy Systems LLC, a company investing in renewable energy parks in  Bulgaria and other countries.  EBRD noted in a 2008 analysis that 'Bulgaria's  advantage, apart from the existing wind potential, is the supportive  government with a pro-active regulatory approach. ''I would say that the Bulgarian legal framework is in a much better position  than the Romanian one at the moment,' Mihaylov told IPS.  'Currently, the  Bulgarian government issues 15 years contracts for 100 percent purchase of  the electricity (produced by wind parks) at subsidised rates. 'Most producers are likely to get a high percentage of their production  subsidised at high rates, says Mihaylov.  'There are still many gaps in the  contracts that are issued, but I am happy to say that the government is  working on fixing them. 'On the other side of the border in Romania, less than 100 MW production  capacity has been installed so far.  Applications for projects adding up to  17,000 MW capacity have been filed by investors with the national electricity  authority, but barely a fraction of this will materialise.  Some of the proposals are not serious, and so authorities are right to turn  them down, says Radu Voinescu, managing partner at Boeru Voinescu Group,  a leading wind energy consultancy in Romania.  Another reason for low acceptance of wind park proposals is that the national  electricity grid can sustain at most 2000 MW wind power, says Voinescu.   Wind power needs special adaptations of the grid to store energy for the  times when the wind is not strong enough.  Expanding and adapting the electricity grid will need billions of euros, and  political will to support renewables.  Unlike in Bulgaria, in Romania the purchase price for renewable energy has  been left mainly to the market, making it tougher for producers to estimate  profits and plan for the long term.  'Since 2008, we do have a law promoting renewables, through the use of  green certificates and feed-in-tariffs (an incentive structure for renewables  which means the state pledges to buy energy from renewables at above- market prices),' Voinescu told IPS.  'But the methodological norms for  implementing the law do not exist yet, and investors are left with many  unanswered questions.  Feed-in tariffs are not clarified in the law, so they  remain just an option for the future. ''The Romanian government has chosen to attract mainly big investors,' says  Anka Zaion-Cicovski, international development representative of the French  renewables company Valorem Energie.  'Here, the purchasing tariffs are  guaranteed for only one year, thus limiting the possibility for independent  green electricity producers to access the market.  'The risk perceived by our financial partners is higher, and this makes project  financing more complicated in Romania as compared to other countries such  as France or Germany, where the feed-in tariffs are guaranteed for at least  12 years. ' 'Our politicians do not seem to be very interested in investing in the  expansion of the national electricity grid (to take on more energy from  renewables),' adds Radu Voinescu.  'But such an investment in infrastructure is exactly the type of investment  that a country must take on in times of economic crisis.  Romanian authorities  have an obligation to invest in energy infrastructure and in education, without  which the country has no future. ' 