The 12 giant wind turbines tower more than 100 metres above the sea, some 50  kilometres north of Borkum island in the North Sea close to the border with the  Netherlands. Given average wind speed of 12 metres a second, each turbine would  generate five megawatts (MW) of electricity per year.  Together the turbines  would meet the demands of 50,000 people in a small-sized north German  city like Emden.  Some 200 kilometres northeast of Borkum, just off the Danish seaside resort  Blåvand, 91 turbines could generate 225 MW between them. The facilities, which should be completed by the end of this year, are among  17 offshore projects authorised by the German government.  Going offshore is  the next big step Germany has taken towards stepping up renewable energy. The installed wind energy capacity in Germany has gone up fourfold since  2000.  With a generation capacity of more than 24,000 MW, Germany is the  biggest European user of wind energy. 'Through implementation of these two offshore projects, an additional  installed capacity of some 300 MW will be available by the end of the year,'  Ulf Gerder from the German Wind Energy Association (BWE after its German  name) told IPS. Use of wind energy is rising rapidly, according to the European Wind Energy  Association (EWEA).  'The European Commission's 1997 white paper on  renewable sources of energy set a target for 40,000 MW of wind power to be  installed in the EU by 2010.  That target was reached in 2005, five years  ahead of schedule,' the EWEA says in a study. 'Interest in wind energy is growing globally and thus also a demand for  systems, components and services for wind energy plants,' BWE president  Hermann Albers told IPS.  'The German wind energy industry's lead in  international competition pays off with an export rate of over 80 percent.  The  industry creates economic growth and employment in Germany, securing  approximately 100,000 direct and indirect jobs. ' Revenues from wind energy plants and their components built in Germany  rose in 2008 by nearly 12 percent relative to 2007, from 7. 6 billion to 8. 5  billion euros.  Exports brought in 82 percent of those proceeds. Germany is the European leader in use of wind energy, followed by Spain, but  is fifth in terms of relative use.  The leading country is Denmark, with more  than 22 percent of its total energy generated by wind turbines. Denmark began using wind energy in the early 1980s, following the global  fear after the oil crisis of the 1970s.  The government also raised taxes on  power consumption and provided subsidies to improve energy efficiency, for  instance through better thermal isolation of buildings. As former prime minister Anders Fogh Rasmussen put it, Denmark has shown  that 'you can reduce energy use and carbon emissions, and still achieve  economic growth. ' Denmark's focus on renewable sources 'started out without any regard for  the climate or the environment,' Svend Auken, former leader of the local  Social Democrat party and the mastermind behind the environmental policies  of the 1990s told IPS.  The primary goal was to ensure energy independence. Its policies helped Denmark fuel its economic growth, strengthen its energy  independence, and at the same time reduce greenhouse gases emissions by  13. 3 percent compared to 1990 levels.  'Today there's a national consensus that Denmark must continue expanding  renewable power,' Auken added.  The European Wind Energy Association estimates that Denmark has the  world's largest offshore wind capacity, with 409 MW.  'The UK (404 MW) is a  very close second, having installed 100 MW in 2007,' the group says.  Sweden  installed 110 MW in 2007, and the Netherlands and Ireland also have offshore  wind farms.  Germany aims to have an onshore wind energy capacity of 45,000 MW by  2020, with an additional 10,000 MW from offshore wind.  Wind energy could  deliver 25 percent of German's electricity consumption.  'It will be important that the framework conditions are set in the right way,'  says Albers, referring particularly to the prices for wind power set by the  government to compensate for a substantial increase in production costs. 'For the wind sector improvements are already visible for offshore tariffs  which shall be set at 14 cents/kWh for the first 12 years of operation,' Albers  said.  'The discussion for onshore wind, however, is much more difficult.   Prices for wind turbines have risen - not only in Germany - by 20 to 30  percent in relation to capacity.  This is mainly due to higher raw material  prices. ' 