A rising population and climate change need to be considered together in an  integrated policy, experts demanded at a forum on sexual and reproductive  health and development held in Berlin Sep.  2-4. Family planning is not at present being considered in the context of climate  change, even though national adaptation programmes to climate change of  the less developed countries point out the link between population growth  and pressure on the environment within the context of climate change. The governments of the 40 poorest countries have recently linked population  growth and environmental catastrophes, but few directly address population  growth in their adaptation strategies to climate change.  'Family planning in the developing world remains within its reproductive  health sector 'silo', and has yet to be addressed on a large scale with the  multi-sector approach it both merits and requires,' Leo Bryant, a British  activist for sexual education and health at the Marie Stopes International  foundation told IPS.  Marie Stopes provides family planning, abortion,  vasectomy and other reproductive healthcare services around the world. Since 2004, 41 of the poorest countries have submitted their adaptation  plans to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change  (UNFCCC).  In an analysis of these for the World Health Organisation (WHO),  Bryant reviewed 40 of the plans, and found that governments identify  population issues as linked directly to climate change. 'Ninety-three percent of the reports refer to 'rapid population growth' as a  factor aggravating the impact of changing weather conditions, such as  vulnerability to flood, drought and decreased crop yield,' Bryant told IPS. 'Many common themes emerge within the reports regarding specific climate  change effects,' Bryant says in his report for WHO due to be published next  month.  'Almost all (38 of 40) identify the risk of increased flooding, while 36  identify longer or more frequent periods of drought.  Thirty-three identify  reduced crop yield, 35 fresh water scarcity, and 37 discuss threats to  biodiversity. 'But only six reports identified rapid population growth as a priority issue to  be addressed specifically within the climate strategy. Developing countries must recognise the 'synergies between family planning,  sexual education, development, and environmental equilibrium,' said Kulvashi  Devi Hurrynag, a women's rights activist from Mauritius. Mauritius, an island state off the East African coast, will likely be one of the  first victims of climate change due to rising sea levels, said Hurrynag at a  workshop on population growth, sexual and reproductive health, and climate  change.  'We do not want to flee to other regions of the world to escape the  consequences of climate change. 'According to UN estimates, the world population will reach 12. 5 billion  people by 2050 given present trends.  This would bring several billion additional tonnes of carbon emissions,  making mitigation of climate change impossible.  An increased level of human  development spread more evenly across the world would limit population  growth, and help limit climate change. An integrated approach is therefore needed, experts say, linking  empowerment of women and better sexual education and health services with  sustainable agriculture and strategies to reduce carbon emissions. 'It is clear that the new climate change agreement is also a deal for  development,' Helen Clark, administrator of the UN Development Programme  (UNDP) said at the forum. There is a 'virtuous cycle formed by educating women and families in the  developing world on the number of children they actually wish to have,  improving the health of women and promoting gender equality, reducing  poverty and hunger, and mitigating climate change,' Clark said.   