With a generating capacity of only 190 megawatts, the Dak Mi 4 hydropower  project being constructed in the central Vietnamese province of Quang Nam is  small by international standards. But it is causing major headaches for the Vietnamese government. The construction of the dam has been provoking fierce opposition from local  residents, who complain that it will divert the flow of water from one river,  the Vu Gia, into another, the Thu Bon.  This, they argued, would prevent the  natural flow of water to the large coastal city of Da Nang. In late August, the Ministry of Trade and Industry (MTI) in the capital Hanoi  rejected a petition from Da Nang People’s Committee calling for the project  to be halted, saying it would not undermine water supply, as many feared. The petition claimed that the 269 million-U. S. -dollar dam project would  seriously impact the flow of water to the coastal city, and 'would leave us (Da  Nang) without enough fresh water'.  The Vu Gia-Thu Bon river system originates in the Truong Son mountain  range in the west of central Vietnam, and provides fresh water to a host of  lowland areas and local communities. Construction of the Dak Mi 4 plant began in 2007 and is expected to wrap up  in 2010. The conflict over the dam is illustrative of wider concerns about how to  balance environmental preservation and hydropower development in a  country like Vietnam, whose GDP grew by an average 7. 6 percent from 2000  to 2007.  While this figure has slowed due to the global financial crisis, GDP  growth for 2009, is projected to be at 4. 5 percent and to recover in the next  years. While some dam projects, such as the 2,700-mw Son La dam in north  Vietnam are massive, most of the hydropower projects in the country are  small scale, generating between 10 to 30 mw. Sixty-eight mainly small-scale hydropower projects of various sizes are  planned for construction on rivers in Quang Nam province alone, including  the Vu Gia-Thu Bon rivers.  Others are being built or are being planned for  other waterways across the country. Officially, these projects are being built to meet the growing demand for  power in Vietnam, which outstrips supply, particularly in the hot season.  The  government puts the growth in demand for electricity at 15 percent a year,  and Vietnam imports power across the border from neighbouring China. Vietnam’s concerns are such that the government plans to have its first  nuclear power plant in five years and to draw 10 percent of power from  nuclear sources by 2030. But cases like the Dak Mi project have also spurred some discussion of  different ways of managing this demand and evaluating the impact of the  construction of dams, even small ones. For instance, Nguyen Quoc An, assistant to the president of the Association  of Energy of Vietnam, says the total energy generated by small-scale  hydropower plants remains insignificant compared to national needs. This is because these plants mainly operate in the rainy season when there is  less demand of electricity.  'Investing into small-scale hydropower plants at  the present time might not be the best option,' he told IPS.  Many investors of hydropower plants in Northern Lao Cai province have  already found it hard to sell their product to Energy of Vietnam (EVN), the sole  buyer of electricity in Vietnam, An said.  Their plants are located too far from the national grid, and they do not have  the financial capacity to build transmission lines that connect to these to  consumers. But trade ministry officials have stated that the power sector is keen to make  full use of the country’s water resources and wean Vietnam off its  overdependence on power generated from coal and gas. 'In many other countries, up to 80 to 90 percent of energy is generated from  hydropower,' Dr Ho Sy Du, director of the hydroelectricity department at the  Hanoi College of Irrigation, told ‘Saigon Marketing Weekly’ magazine. 'In Vietnam, we have just used 30 to 40 percent (hydropower).  Therefore we  must use much more (hydropower) in the future,' he said.  Some 60 percent  of Vietnam’s energy is from gas and coal. Still, in a concession to the Da Nang commune’s position, industry and trade  ministry officials said they had asked investors in the Dak Mi project to  calculate how much water the river would actually supply to Da Nang when it  is completed. Elsewhere, plans to develop dams in different parts of the country remain in  place.   The mountainous northern province of Lao Cai reports having 21  hydropower plants planned with a total capacity of 465 megawatts. Investors in small-scale hydropower plants are not required to submit  environmental impact assessment reports for central government approval,  making it easier for these projects to get underway.  They only need to have  their projects approved by commune or village authorities. In the balancing act that countries like Vietnam need to do at a time when  many hydropower projects in different parts of the Mekong region are  underway, analysts grant that dams are often seen as a cleaner source of  energy than coal or nuclear power.  But they say that ill-conceived small-scale projects can still cause major  harm to the environment, adding that the culmulative impact of more than  one project on the same river also raises other concerns. The construction of the Dak Mi 4 hydropower dam and the other projects  planned for the Vu Gia-Thu Bon rivers are a case in point.  'The construction of so many hydropower plants on the same river will affect  the flow of water downstream,' said Huynh Van Thang, vice chief of Da  Nang’s Agriculture and Rural Development Department. Severe droughts and encroaching seawater into lowland areas are among the  adverse effects of several poorly conceived hydropower plants built along the  river system, he said.   'It’s not good enough only to evaluate the impacts of each hydro-power  plant on a section of a river,' Ruth Matthews of the World Wildlife Fund, told  local reporters on the sidelines of recent workshop on management of the Vu  Gia-Thu Bon river basin.   'The entire river basin must be studied so that planners and officials have a  comprehensive view about the cumulative impacts of all the projects on a  river,' Matthews added.  