Garbage collectors in Cairo's Giza district have resumed work, but it could take  weeks to clear the 25,000 tons of garbage that accumulated during their  month-long strike, and longer still to solve the underlying problems. 'We're drowning in garbage,' says Hany El-Sayed, a butcher whose shop  overlooks a metre-high pile of flyblown rubbish.  'Some of us hired a guy  with a truck to remove the pile, but next day it was back, and bigger.  When  people heard we were removing the garbage they brought everything they  could carry and dumped it here. 'Street corners and vacant lots in Giza district became makeshift landfills after  a row erupted in August between Giza Cleaning and Beautification Authority  (GCBA) and Italian waste management firm International Environmental  Services (IES), which holds a concession for garbage collection in parts of the  populous district.  The two sides have been in a simmering contract dispute since 2003.  IES says  its 15-year service agreement requires it to clean the streets assigned to it  once a day.  GCBA expects streets to be kept clean at all times, and says a  clause permits the authority to levy fines if the Italian company fails to meet  expectations. The fines have been excessive, complains IES spokesman Ahmed Nabil.  He  says the government agency is deducting over 60 percent of the firm's  monthly service fee to cover the fines and taxes it imposes.  This has left the  company unable to pay its employees, repair equipment or replace stolen  bins - which has hampered its ability to carry out the service. An IES employee, speaking on condition of anonymity, accused government  officials of assessing arbitrary penalties to pad municipal coffers.  Unpaid  collection fees and hefty fines have already forced two of the four foreign  waste management companies contracted in 2001 to pull the plug on their  Cairo operations. The contract dispute between GCBA and IES has been brewing for years, but it  boiled over this summer as a consequence of a rash and poorly studied  government decree.  In April, Egypt's health minister ordered the slaughter of  all 300,000 pigs in the country as a precaution against swine flu.  The cull,  which the World Health Organisation criticized as entirely unnecessary,  removed a cornerstone of the capital's integrated waste management system. For decades, trash collectors known as zebaleen have made a living going  door to door in Cairo to pick up garbage, which they take to their  impoverished communities for sorting and recycling.  The government's  decision to hire foreign companies to manage garbage collection created a  conflict with the city's 60,000 zebaleen, but an agreement was soon reached  by which the firms subcontracted zebaleen to collect the garbage from  residences and deliver it to bins on the street, where company vehicles would  transport it to landfills and composting depots. 'The system had its problems, but it was a workable arrangement,' says  Ibrahim Attia, a collection supervisor for GCBA.  He said the zebaleen  supplemented their meagre incomes by removing organic and recyclable  items from the garbage before delivering it to the curb.  This reduced the  overall volume of waste that the foreign companies had to collect. The nationwide pig cull upset the equilibrium, says Yasser Sherif, general  manager of Environics, an environment consultancy firm.  'The problem is that  the zebaleen were collecting the organic material to feed to their pigs as part  of an efficient system of recycling garbage.  Now that we don't have any pigs,  nobody's really sure what to do with all the organic waste. 'Once the incentive to recycle organic waste was removed, the zebaleen  stopped processing it, and the volume of rubbish reaching the curb increased  sharply.  Some zebaleen sought to recover the losses to their recycling and  pig-raising operations by charging households additional fees for collection.   To avoid paying, many residents have resorted to dumping their trash  illegally. The larger volume of garbage has put more pressure on Cairo's waste  management firms.  Bins must be emptied more frequently and fines are  levied whenever municipal officials discover piles of dumped rubbish.  The  firms are floundering, and citizens complain that the city has become a giant  landfill. The breakdown was inevitable, observes Sherif.  'If you remove an element  from a system, it may adapt somehow, but did anyone think how this system  would adapt?' IES agreed to resume full collection service this week after scaling back  operations due to financial constraints.  The company has entered  negotiations with municipal officials to resolve longstanding contractual  issues, but experts say a better sorting and recycling system is needed to  cope with the 13,000 tons of trash that Cairo produces each day. Suggestions have included increasing landfill and composting capacity, paying  zebaleen to deliver organic waste to compost plants, or establishing goat  farms outside the city to fill the role once occupied by hogs.  One of the more  promising ideas is to introduce the concept of source segregation, where  households pre-sort garbage into organic and dry waste. 'If we can convince people to separate their waste into organics and solids we  would spend 10-15 percent less on waste management,' says Amin Khayal,  head of Solid Waste Management at the Egyptian Environmental Affairs  Agency (EEAA).  'Solid waste is easily separated into textiles, metals, etc.  once  you remove the organics.  The organic waste can go directly to the compost  plants to be made into fertiliser, while the separated (solid component) will  require only half the labour to process. 'Source segregation is already in practice in many developed countries, but  trials in various Egyptian communities have shown some limitations.   Participation rates ranged from 35 to 90 percent.  Researchers found a  correlation between household income and the willingness to participate -  the poorer the neighbourhood, the higher the compliance. Khayal is cautious.  'We must give (homeowners) incentives if we are to have  any chance of succeeding,' he says.  