In wealthy Malaysia that employs over four million Asians to service its high- rolling lifestyle, a tiny indigenous tribe is fighting for its survival against state  inaction and bureaucratic apathy, as well as marauding giant multinationals and  timber loggers. It is an increasingly losing battle for the Penan, a tribe of about 12,000 semi- nomadic people fighting against destruction of their home in the jungles of  Sarawak state in East Malaysia, home to the world’s oldest rain forest and a  complex ecosystem. The state’s wildlife and unique tropical ecosystem are equally under threat  from loggers who swing into the forest felling the best trees, leaving giant oil  palm plantations while clearing the logged forest to grow more palm oil. In recent months about 3,000 Penan in the Bakun area in upper Rejang River  — the second longest river in the country — faced severe food shortage for  various reasons, including drought sparked by deforestation.  Food supplies  had to be airlifted after church groups raised the alarm.  Exacerbating their already harsh living condition is that Penan women and  children are being raped by loggers and their workers, according to a long- delayed government report that concluded in mid-September what human  rights activists and non-governmental organisations had been saying for at  least a decade.  But despite evidence of sexual assaults, Malaysian police are dragging their  feet in investigating the cases and bringing the culprits to justice. 'They don’t take the Penan people seriously; they give all kinds of excuses  (for their inaction),' Ragunath Kesavan, leading rights lawyer and president of  the Malaysian Bar Council, an association of legal practitioners, told IPS.   '(The) Penan might be semi-nomadic and live differently.  Nevertheless they  are (still) citizens and have the same rights to protection under the laws as  other citizens. ' The beleaguered tribals are fighting back in the way they know best -- with  spears and blowpipes with which they arm themselves when staging their  blockades, and the media.  Assisted by a network of supporters here and  abroad, they are using the press to shame the government for their alleged  inaction and force concession. The rate of deforestation in Malaysia is estimated to be the fastest in any  tropical country in the world, according to United Nations data.  The Food and  Agriculture Organisation, a U. N.  agency, shows the annual deforestation rate  jumped almost 86 percent between the periods 1990-2000 and 2000-2005. Annually, Malaysia has lost an average of 140,200 hectares or 0. 65 percent of  its forest area since 2000. Oil palm plantation acreage and world palm oil output increased dramatically  as the forest vanished during the same period.  The prized commodity is now  the world’s most important edible oil in global production and consumption. Between 2006 and 2007, it held approximately 32 percent of the market  share of all edible oils by production in comparison to soybean oil, which  comprised about 29 percent of the world market for oils.  Malaysia and Indonesia produce the majority of the world’s palm oil,  accounting for approximately 86 percent of the total global production.  Malaysia has a policy framework for sustainable forest management based on  its National Forestry Act of 1984.  Yet on the ground, rampant logging is the  norm, sources said. Though faced with an uphill battle on several fronts, the Penan are chalking  up some victories.  They are successfully blocking logging roads with  barricades, raising hues and cries in the Malaysian media while bringing their  woes to the Malaysian parliament. Opposition lawmakers are now actively taking up their cause and speaking up  for their rights — a far cry from the 1980s when blockades installed by the  tribe were broken up and protest put down with brute force. Then, too, there is considerable sympathy for the Penan among the local  population.  An awakened electorate concedes the Penan have the right to  preserve their habitat and traditional lifestyle. Amid these developments is the state’s glaring inaction on the plight of its  indigenous population, advocates say, who noted that it had only paid lip  service to the U. N.  Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples that it  voted to adopt in 2007. 'This inaction to protect and promote and recognise their indigenous people  is alarming,' said human rights lawyer Ragunath Kesavan.  'The sexual abuse  faced by the Penan is but one of a multitude of human rights violations that  indigenous communities face.  Their traditions, customs and values are being  eroded and their needs have been long neglected. 'He added that it is time 'the government formally recognizes, protects and  guarantees the right of indigenous peoples to their ancestral lands and to  gazette such ancestral lands as reserved areas. 'Pressured from every side to aid the Penan tribe and stop the destruction of  their habitat, the authorities -- in an unprecedented move -- reached out to  the tribal group to iron out a peace deal. According to the mass-circulated ‘Star’ daily around the third week of  September, the Sarawak government, prodded by the federal government in  Kuala Lumpur, had agreed to several Penan demands as preconditions for  ending the anti-logging blockades, which had significantly hurt the profits of  the timber companies.      The concessions include state recognition of the Penan as the original settlers  of the island of Borneo, right to ancestral land and farmland for the semi- nomadic tribe.  Other concessions include the provision of basic infrastructure, including  housing complete with electricity and water, clinics, kindergartens and  primary schools; official aid for rubber tree planting and fruit farming; and  skills training. Local officials claimed the Penan have acceded to these compromised  solutions.  Promising 'positive results within three months,' they said that with  the 'peace deal,' the Penan have agreed to allow logging to resume, the ‘Star’  daily quoted them as saying. The deal, however, was rejected by some Penan and questioned by rights  NGO, saying the concessions were only on paper, adding that allowing  logging to resume is inimical to the Penan’s interests in the long run. They warned that the anti-logging protest and blockades would resume if  the promises were not kept. END/AP/EN/DV/IP/BK/TBB/09/ 