Three days may have been a small window of opportunity, but it was enough  time to save thousands of lives. Approximately 200,000 people were evacuated by emergency services just  before typhoon Ketsana made landfall on Vietnam’s central coast on Sep.  29,  after blowing across the South China Sea from the Philippines, where it  unleashed a month’s worth of rain in just 12 hours. Ketsana hit Manila and surrounding areas on Saturday, Sep.  26, leaving 246  people dead and more than 107,000 families homeless.  Damage was  estimated at 5. 6 billion pesos (118. 6 million U. S.  dollars), according to the  National Disaster Coordinating Council. 'The fact that the typhoon hit the Philippines gave Vietnam time.  (Relocating)  200,000 people in two days saved many, many lives,' Ugo Blanco,  programme officer of the disaster mitigation arm of the United Nations  Development Programme (UNDP), told IPS via phone.  This downgraded  problems to 'low to middle impact' from the 'deadly' typhoon, he said, which  has to date killed over 400 people in the Philippines, Vietnam and Cambodia. 'The Vietnamese government has done a tremendous job preparing for the  storm.  They’ve been tracking the storm for several days, evacuating people  from high-risk areas, closing schools and taking necessary precautions to  keep casualties as low as possible,' wrote Peter Newsum, the country director  of CARE International on a Sep.  30 blog on the aid organisation’s website.  Residents of the Ketsana-hit areas in Vietnam took their own precautions as  well, such as sandbagging their roofs, a common practice in areas where  typhoons and tropical storms are regular misfortunes. Ketsana is the worst disaster to hit the communist state in years.  It has left  over 100 people dead and 120 million U. S.  dollars worth of damage.  Vietnam  floods killed some 750 people in 1999 while typhoons Xangsane and Durian  both left at least 70 dead in 2006.  At least 14 are still missing in the central coastal and highlands regions in  the wake of Tuesday’s typhoon whose winds reached up to 167 kilometres an  hour.  Over 17,000 houses were destroyed and close to 4,000 classrooms  damaged.  According to state media reports, 10 provinces were affected and  some 200,000 hectares of cropland were destroyed. Professional photographer Nguyen Trong Tung, who lives in the capital, was  visiting a friend when the storm hit.  'The rains moved all the trees and the  wind was so loud.  It was raining all the time. ''The devastation is unbelievable, though at least the river’s gone back to  where it belongs,' says Steve Harrison, a resident of Hoi An, a popular tourist  spot on Vietnam’s south central coast.  He adds that debris from various  landslides floated into the town at the height of the storm, leaving large logs  in the town’s main streets. Foreign tourists in Hoi An were stranded in hotels, sometimes doubling up in  rooms after their accommodations became uninhabitable, according to media  reports.  Rescue workers delivered instant noodles and drinking water via  boat. Prime Minister Nguyen Tan Dung, who visited the affected areas on Sep.  29  and 30, pledged to give 460 million Vietnam dong (28,000 U. S.  dollars) in  assistance and 10,000 tonnes of rice to the victims.  U. S.  Secretary of State  Hilary Clinton offered Vietnam aid during a visit to Washington by Vietnam’s  Foreign Minister Pham Gia Khiem.  The European Commission has promised 2  million euros (2. 9 million U. S.  dollars) in aid to Vietnam along with Cambodia  and Laos, according to the ‘Thanh Nien News’ daily. Teams of foreign experts from humanitarian organisations, including Oxfam,  CARE, Save the Children, and the UNDP, are set to visit the affected areas to  carry out surveys on the longer-term impacts of the typhoon and possible  relief and rehabilitation efforts. Vietnam is now clearing up after floodwaters left by typhoon Ketsana began  to recede in some of the flood-ravaged areas.  Already the nation is bracing  itself for yet another powerful typhoon — codenamed Parma, a category five  storm — that could massive damage and casualties it its wake unless  adequate disaster mitigation measures are in place. Typhoon Parma is expected to hit the Philippines Saturday, Oct.  3. In May 2006 typhoon Chanchu hit the Philippines, killing 41 people.  It did not  make landfall in Vietnam, but inadequate warnings to fishermen working the  South China Sea meant many were lost at sea.  Public anger followed. Vietnam has a tropical monsoon climate, and storms are nothing new to the  nation.  However, the UNDP says that in recent years the frequency and  severity of such storms has increased as a result of climate change. 'Vietnam suffers 6. 4 typhoons per year (on average),' said Blanco.  'This is  already typhoon number nine, and we have one or to months until the end of  the season.  I would say climate change will impact negatively. ' According to international organisations like the UNDP have reported that  Vietnam is also at risk from rising sea levels, which may leave up to 40  percent of land under water. 