With the clock ticking away on the United Nations Framework for Climate  Change Committee (UNFCCC) summit in Copenhagen in December, the  fractiousness between the developed and the developing nations on who ought  to do more to control climate change is getting increasingly strident. With 190 nations poised to forge a momentous agreement to replace the  1997 Kyoto Protocol -- an international environment treaty that establishes  legally binding commitment for the reduction of greenhouse gases (GHGs) —  there is still no unanimity on how to spread out GHG emission curbs.  The  amount of financial support and clean technology rich nations should transfer  to the poorer ones to help them cope with the cataclysmic effects of rising  temperatures is also nebulous.   The urgency to save the planet is lost on no one.  Science has proven beyond  doubt that the ramifications of rising global temperatures can greatly imperil  life on earth.  The world needs to keep emissions levels pegged low to help  push the planet off the precipice of global warming.  Rainfall patterns and  agricultural activity -- already hostage to nature’s caprices — are getting  seriously impacted, hitting millions of farmers around the world to further  diminish the world’s already shrinking granaries.  India -- a prominent player of the Group of 77 countries that have a common  negotiating plank — has based its climate change stand on two clear  principles.  First, that the current stock of GHGs in the atmosphere is the cumulative  result of emissions over 150 to 200 years for which the developed nations are  entirely responsible.  It is only fair, therefore, that the major emission cuts  should also come from them. Second, the UNFCCC outlines the principle of equity, according to which every  individual in the world should have equal share of total emissions.  India’s  argument is that since its annual per capita emissions are way below the  world average (1. 9 tons), eclipsed by China’s 3. 9 tons and the United States’s  24. 3 tons, why should it be pressured further to whittle down its emissions? However, if the developed world expects India to sign on to a carbon- reduction plan, it is only fair that the latter pays for it in terms of cash and  technology transfer.  Even the UNFCCC acknowledges the primary  responsibility of developed countries in triggering global warming.  It notes  further that the developing countries have to first address poverty eradication  through economic development, and rich nations ought to assist developing  ones with their mitigation efforts through both financial compensation and  technology transfer. Already, nearly half of India’s 1. 3 billion populace lives in villages with no  access to commercial electricity.  This helps keeps tabs — albeit indirectly --  on its emissions.  In addition, more than half the Indians subsist frugally on  less than a dollar a day, which is quite the antithesis of a Westerner’s  consumptive lifestyle.   Despite this, pressure is ratcheting up on developing economies like India to  agree to a time-bound and mandatory emissions reduction protocol.  This  point was also driven home by U. S.  Secretary of State Hillary Clinton on her  India visit in July.  This prompted India’s Minister for Environment and Forests, Jairam Ramesh,  to state that India cannot let its environmental agenda obfuscate its growth  and development.  The problem, asserted the minister, has been created by  the carbon profligacy of developed countries, and so India’s right to  economic development cannot be imperiled by emissions caps designed to  make up for Western progress.  Recently, the minister reiterated India’s stand yet again in a strongly worded  message by stating 'India will walk out of the Copenhagen talks if the  Western nations insist on enforcing any kind of legal bindings on its emission  trajectory'.  At the same time, lest India be seen as intransigent on the matter, Ramesh  has asserted that India is already well aware of its global environmental  responsibility.  'For us,' said the minister, 'GDP doesn’t mean Gross Domestic  Product but Green Domestic Product.  Unless we think of green economic  growth, our growth will not be sustainable. ' The United States, under the Obama administration, is perceived to be willing  to sign an agreement that puts restrictions on carbon emissions.  As a  reaction, India has already asserted that it would be 'most unfortunate' if  countries like the U. S.  decided to place border adjustment taxes on goods  produced under less stringent emissions regulations. Therefore, in a clever move, the Western nations have now swiveled the  spotlight on India and China as the key players, whose agreement, or lack of  it, will 'make or break' the Copenhagen deal.  In other words, if Copenhagen  fails, we all know who to blame. But India’s perceived recalcitrance notwithstanding, its government has  engaged significantly with climate change through a prime ministerial  directive called the National Action Plan (NAP) on Climate Change released  last year.  It has also funded adaptation efforts such as economic support for  small farmers to switch to growing crops suited to warmer temperatures all  over the country.  Overall, the government intends to spend two percent of its  current GDP on tackling climate change. Inarguably, the Indian focus — hitherto skewed more on 'adaptation' rather  than mitigation of the effects of climate change — will now firmly be on how  to counter the challenges of environmental degradation and changing crop  patterns.  The official approach is also being recalibrated towards proactive mitigation  measures that would reduce the country’s dependence on conventional fossil  fuel and oil imports to shift towards alternative clean energy solutions. Prime Minister Manmohan Singh has said that the government also proposes  to set up a national climate change mitigation authority (NCCMA).  This body  will assign and monitor green targets to be achieved by the year 2020  towards reducing India's greenhouse gas emissions.  The NCCMA's guidelines  would complement NAP’s. The NAP earmarks eight areas or 'missions' for focused energy and climate  policy interventions: solar energy, energy efficiency, sustainable habitat,  water, Himalayan ecosystems, sustainable agriculture, strategic knowledge  for climate change and a 'Green India'.  It also calls for boosting solar power  production; reforestation so that a third of the country is forested, up from  23 per cent; providing financial incentives for energy efficiency; research on  glacier melt; and development of sustainable agriculture. The Indian government’s other steps to control climate change include  grassroots measures like increasing energy efficiency at the level of individual  consumers, including a major drive to popularise energy-efficient compact  fluorescent lamps in households.  The government hopes to increase sales of  these bulbs by making them available for less than the market price, using  the sale of carbon credits to fund this subsidy. It is due to its renewed commitment to combat climate change that India has  moved from being a bit player at erstwhile global climate change summits to  wrest centre stage.  Ed Miliband, Britain’s Climate Change Secretary, estimates  that rather than a 'deal breaker,' India will be a 'potential deal maker' at  Copenhagen.  This indeed augurs well for the country, bolstering its  negotiating profile to make its voice count at perhaps one of this century’s  most important summits. 