Who knows how many more fossils and species are lurking in the vast,  unexplored riches of South-east Asia?A fossil of a mammal dating back six to eight million years and a new living  species of stingray have been discovered in northeastern and southern  Thailand, respectively. Both discoveries were presented Thursday by the Nakhon Ratchasima  Rajabhat University’s Institute for Petrified Wood and Mineral Resources in  the Thai capital.  Barely two weeks ago, the World Wide Fund For Nature (WWF) announced to  the public that 163 new species were discovered over the past year in the  Mekong River region, as stated in its report, ‘Close Encounters’. The fossil mammal — which resembles both a pig and a hippopotamus — was  discovered in 2001 by Dr Rattanaphorn Hanta in the Thachan subdistrict of  Nakhon Ratchasima province in the northeastern part of the South-east  nation.  It was named ‘Merycopotamus thachangensis’ after its locality. A research team member found the fossil at the bottom of a pit nearly 25  metres below the surface, said Dr Hanta, a researcher and curator at the  Institute. The fossil was recognised by its elongated flat skull and its nostrils and eyes  that were located on the same anatomical plane — known characteristics of  the ‘Merycopotamus’ genus.  '[It is] very similar to a hippopotamus, indicating  that it lived like a hippo, sometimes living in water and sometimes walking  on land and eating grass,' said Dr Hanta. Its unique tooth structure also indicated that it was distinct from the three  previously known species from the Merycopotamus genus, namely, the  ‘Merycopotamus dissimilis’, ‘Merycopotamus medioximus,’, and  ‘Merycopotamus nanus’, which were discovered in 1868, 1977, and 2004,  respectively, in Burma, India, and Pakistan.  'In more primitive species, their tooth ridges are thick and continuous, and in  younger ones their ridges are totally separate [in the newly discovered  fossil] the ridges still remain, so we’re guessing it might have evolved [from  them],' she added. The mammal is estimated to be 0. 8 metres in height, had short legs and  inhabited rivers covered by forests or swamps with adjacent grasslands. For Dr Chavalit Vidthayanon and Pairoj Sirimontaporn, senior fishery biologist  at the National Institute of Coastal Aquaculture in Songkhla, Thailand, 10  years of searching for a stingray species that they feared had been decimated  did not prove futile. They discovered the new living species off the freshwater zone of inner Lake  Songkhla in southern Thailand.  The two scientists said the stingray, including  its wings, spans 1. 3 metres in length and weighs 50 to 60 kilograms. 'I’ve been looking for this stingray for almost 10 years,' said Dr Vidthayanon,  who is the vice director at the Institute, which has been conducting  palaeontology and biodiversity research in the region for nearly a decade. The stingray has been fished and consumed by local communities for a long  time, but has only recently been classified in science, he added.  Landing reports showed that between 1987 and 1995, around 200 to 300 of  the newly discovered stingray species were caught annually.  However  recently, only 10 or so were caught, raising fears that the stingray was  potentially endangered. Yet another group of new species inhabiting the Mekong River, the discovery  of which is also credited to Dr Vidthayanon, is awaiting public announcement  pending review by the scientific community.  The three marine species are  expected to join the growing list of newly found species in the region. But while scientists and environmental groups alike hail the discovery of new  species, they have also raised alarm bells, calling for decisive steps to arrest  the extinction of threatened species.  'Overfishing, changes in water quality, or overfishing, not of the stingray but  of several fishes in the lake [affects the stingray],' said Vidthayanon.  'Their  diet or the food chain may [then] face difficulties, causing the stingray to  obtain fewer food, reproducing fewer offspring. 'Climate change is considered another factor posing serious harm to rare and  endangered species.  'Some species will be able to adapt to climate change,  many will not, potentially resulting in massive extinctions,' states the WWF  report, launched on Sep.  25 as part of the conservation group’s Greater  Mekong Programme. In the run-up to the Copenhagen climate change summit scheduled for  December, concerned groups such as the WWF have called for bolder targets  for reducing greenhouse gas emissions (GhG), which have been blamed for  global warming.  The December meeting is expected to produce a new treaty  that will replace the Kyoto Protocol, which is set to expire in 2012. 'Some of these new species that have just been found might be at risk,' said  Geoff Blate, climate change coordinator for the WWF Greater Mekong  Programme, at the launch of the report. South-east Asia is known for its rich biodiversity.  'Despite occupying a  meager three percent of the earth’s total surface, the region is home to 20  percent of all known species of plants and animals, making it critically  important to global environmental sustainability,' states the  intergovernmental ASEAN (Association of Southeast Asian Nations) Centre for  Biodiversity. Within the region, the Mekong River is considered 'the second most  biodiverse river in the world,' second only to the Amazon River, said Stuart  Chapman, director of the WWF Greater Mekong Programme.  The river  connects Cambodia, Laos, Burma, Thailand, Vietnam and the Yunnan province  of China. 'There so many unexplored areas in the Greater Mekong countries, like  freshwater forests and marine habitats,' said Vidthayanon. 