When organisers of an international conference on climate change and the food  crisis first scheduled the event here for late September, little did they realise the  event would be sandwiched by two typhoons buffeting the region.  Ironically, the  first typhoon, ‘Ketsana’, delayed the arrival of conference delegates from the  Philippines. A week after Ketsana struck the Philippines on Sep.  26 and then Vietnam,  Cambodia and Laos, it was the turn of Typhoon Parma to wreak havoc in the  Philippines on Oct.  3.  Now downgraded to a tropical storm, ‘Parma’ is still  lingering over the region and initially entangled with another Pacific super  typhoon, ‘Melor’, which then headed towards Japan. Ketsana left a devastating trail after it dumped the equivalent of one month's  rainfall over Manila within six hours.  Although Parma largely spared the  country, it flooded large tracts of rice fields in northern Philippines and  destroyed crops ready for harvest.  The typhoons in the region brought into sharp relief the issue of climate  change as farmers struggle to cope with changing weather patterns.  It is not  just the sudden storms and heavy rainfalls that are disrupting farming but  also the blurring of the seasons.  'If it rains, it rains heavily.  In the past, there was less rainfall in September  and October, but now there are heavy rains and strong winds,' says Che Ani  Mat Zain, a rice farmer in Kedah in northern Malaysia.  'Our yield is fine if the weather is okay, but not if it is unpredictable,' he  observes, adding that December and January used to be fairly dry months in  Kedah, but now farmers experience more rain.  That is a pattern of disorientation that is being felt across the region.  'The  dry season and wet seasons are now blurred,' concurs Dr Charito Medina,  national coordinator for the Farmer-Scientist Partnership for Development (or  ‘MASIPAG’, its Filipino acronym), a Philippine-based organisation bringing  together 642 farmer organisations, representing 35,000 farmers, 60 non- governmental organisations and 15 scientists.  'Farmers can't rely on a dependable rainfall.  For planting you need the soil to  be wet, so that when you sow seeds, it will germinate,' he noted at the  sidelines of the conference organised by the Pesticide Action Network's Asia  Pacific office on Sep.  27 to 29 in Penang.  Droughts and rainy periods seem to be longer and more intense now.   'Typhoons are becoming stronger and more frequent, and strong winds may  damage crops, which could cause 100 percent damage,' he told IPS days  before Typhoon Parma struck.  Unpredictable rainfall can disrupt the rice-planting season.  If the rain stops  for two weeks, there is crop failure and farmers have to replant.  But they may  not have any more seeds and may need to buy more from agricultural  suppliers, which they may not be able to afford, points out Medina. In Indonesia, Erpan Faryadie, secretary-general of the Alliance of Agrarian  Reform Movement (or AGRA), a national peasants' organisation representing  40,000 landless peasants, farmers and agricultural workers, sees a similar  dismal pattern.  Droughts and floods have become more noticeable in the last decade, after  swathes of Sumatra, Kalimantan and Sulawesi were heavily deforested and  converted to monoculture farming.  More floods have been seen in these  provinces, which rarely happened before, notes Faryadie.  The situation in Java, which accounts for more than half of national rice  production and where forests were lost much earlier, is more pronounced.   During the rainy season, rice fields and agricultural lands in north Java are  sometimes flooded.  'The Green Revolution rice strains couldn’t withstand the  flooding, and the farmers couldn't get their harvests after the flooding,' he  says.  The Green Revolution, a program begun in 1960s to avert a global food crisis,  is based on the use of high-yielding seed varieties using modern inputs of  fertilizers and pesticides. 'The biggest problem was the destruction of traditional farming, which was  enough for farmers’ subsistence and national sufficiency if they used  traditional varieties,' he laments, pointing out that some of the traditional rice  seeds are more resistant to drought and heavy rains, with stalks still standing  after floods.  The blurring of seasons has also hit farmers in the mountains of the Central  Himalayas, where the predictable climate previously ensured food security.   But summer this year produced record temperatures, as the Henwal stream  dried up over a two-kilometre stretch for the first time in living memory.  The  droughts persisted even during the monsoon season, disrupting the planting  cycle.  Meanwhile, the Gangroti Glacier, the source of the Ganga River in Uttarkashi  district of Garhwal Himalaya, continues to retreat by 15 to 20 metres a year.  Some farmers are now trying to adapt to climate change by taking another  look at traditional seeds and farming practices.  MASIPAG in the Philippines adopts a 'farmers’ empowerment' approach: it  encourages farmers to collect, breed and select such traditional varieties of  seeds to produce organic food.  Farmers carry out experiments themselves, with up to 50 varieties planted  side-by-side in trial farms, measuring 600 to 800 square metres.  Traditional  seed varieties are selected as they are the most adaptable, the products of  selection over time.  These are then collected and improved through breeding  and selection.  Some traditional varieties can survive dry spells better; others are more  resistant to pest and diseases, which are themselves influenced by climate  change.  For instance, greater humidity and moisture result in more  microorganisms, which can cause diseases, whereas a prolonged dry season  could lead to more insect pests. Each organisation comprising the farmers’ network then selects the top 10  varieties for the locality under organic conditions — with zero chemical inputs — and these are distributed by the members among themselves.  '(These trials determine) the survival of the fittest (among traditional  varieties),' says Medina.  'In contrast, conventional agriculture creates the  ideal environment by using expensive chemical inputs. 'MASIPAG also promotes a diversified and integrated farming system.  Farmers  are encouraged to plant other crops such as tubers, which are more resistant  to environmental changes because the edible portion lies below the surface  of the soil.  Cassava, sweet potato and cooking banana are also planted as  'survival crops to fill the stomach'.  Biomass is composted for use as organic  fertilizers. Native chickens are reared, and these are regarded as 'ATMs in the backyard':  if there is a typhoon, chickens can be sold in the market to raise emergency  funds to buy supplies.  'You can withdraw (from these ‘ATMs’ when you need  it,' quips Medina.  Similarly, goats and cows, which convert weed into food and  produce manure for the farm, can be sold during emergencies.  Such initiatives are precisely what may be needed.  A new report published by  GRAIN , an international group working to support community-controlled and  biodiversity-based food systems, shows that more sustainable agriculture  can put much of the excess carbon dioxide in the atmosphere back into the  soil.  Evidence in the report shows that industrial agriculture, and the global food  system of which it is part, has sent large amounts of this carbon from the soil  into the atmosphere, the group said in a press release.  And calculations reveal that policies supporting small farmer-centred  agriculture, which also focuses on restoring soil fertility, would play a big role  in resolving the worsening climate crisis.  'In 50 years the soils could capture  about 450 billion tonnes of carbon dioxide, which is more than two thirds of  the current excess in the atmosphere,' says the report.  But that is only if agricultural sovereignty is returned to millions of small  farmers and farming communities, and policies are formulated to support  their livelihoods.  'The evidence is irrefutable.  If we can change the way we farm and the way  we produce and distribute food, then we have a powerful solution for  combating the climate crisis.  There are no technical hurdles to achieving  these results, it is only a matter of political will, says GRAIN coordinator Henk  Hobbelink. *This story is part of a series of features on sustainable development by IPS —  Inter Press Service and IFEJ — International Federation of Environmental  Journalists, for the Alliance of Communicators for Sustainable Development  (www. complusalliance. org). 