A new financial mechanism to help the developing world deal with the  challenges posed by climate change looms as a major hurdle on the road  leading up to a United Nations summit in Copenhagen in mid-December. Negotiators from the developing world and the developed world have only  five days of climate talks in Barcelona, Spain from Nov.  2 to 6 to bridge stark  differences that have emerged between the developed and developing nations  before they head to the Danish capital for the pivotal U. N.  climate change  summit. The only consolation, for now, seems to be hints that 'there was some  convergence in language' between negotiators from the two camps over the  need for climate change funds for the developing world during the two weeks  of the U. N.  climate change talks that ended here on Friday evening. 'Developed world negotiators came here and shared beautiful language, but  we want those words to be translated to real commitments in finance,' Su  Wei, chief negotiator for China, told IPS.  'We have to set up a new financial  mechanism that will be boosted by public funds from the developed world. ''Creating this new financial mechanism will be a crucial part of the  Copenhagen agreement,' he added.  'The burden is on the developed world to  help bridge the differences between them and the developing world. ''We came here with hope and confidence, but have to leave here with  disappointment and deep concern,' Su told negotiators during the closing  session of the Bangkok talks.  'In Barcelona we need to agree on financing. 'His views were echoed by Bernarditas Muller, a leading climate change  negotiator for the Philippines.  'We are extremely concerned by the lack of  numbers and clear funding commitments by the developed world,' she told  IPS.  'There is an attempt to shift the responsibility of financing to developing  countries, to depend on market mechanisms and the private sector. 'Recent estimates by the World Bank placed the bill at between 75 billion U. S.   dollars and 100 billion U. S.  dollars annually till 2050 for the developing  countries to cope and adapt to the ravages of global warming due to  greenhouse gas (GhG) emissions. The Bank’s calculations were based on how much money developing  countries would need to adapt to an environment that would get warmer by  two degrees Celsius than pre-industrial levels by 2050.  Such a warmer Earth  would result in 'more intense' natural disasters, droughts, heat waves and  'extreme weather' patterns, revealed the Bank’s study, released on Sep.  30. Just how wide the gap to create a new financial architecture was reflected in  the contrasting views expressed in a discussion paper on financing climate  change during the just-ended U. N.  climate change talks.  Driving the push for  such new funding mechanism was the Group of 77 (G77) and China, who,  with its 130 members from the developing world, makes up the largest body  of the over 180 countries that participated during the U. N.  climate talks here. For one, the developing world’s negotiators want the new mechanism to be  placed within the ambit of the U. N.  Framework Convention on Climate  Change (UNFCCC), enabling its members who are party to the international  treaty to combat global warming to have a fair say in the disbursement of  funds. This will ensure 'an equitable and balanced representation of all Parties with  a transparent system of governance to address all aspects of the means of  implementation (of climate change funding) for developing countries,' states  a proposal by the G77 and China bloc made available to negotiators — and  seen by IPS — during the last week of the talks here. Proposals from negotiators of the developed world argued differently, placing  more confidence in international financial institutions like the World Bank and  the existing Global Environmental Facility, a partnership of some U. N.   agencies and the Bank, to guide climate change financing.  This financial  arrangement ensures that the richer nations will continue to have a greater  say in the manner funds are disbursed to developing nations. For another, the source of money for three funds — to help developing  countries adapt to climate change, for mitigation and a ‘Multilateral Climate  Technology Fund’ — exposed deep faultlines.  Developing world negotiators  want the Copenhagen summit to endorse a package that would guarantee  new public funds for climate change beyond what the developed world gives  as its current development aid. 'The level of new funding can be set at 0. 5 percent to one percent of the GNP  (gross national product) of (industrialised countries),' states the text of the  developing world’s proposal. Last year, the developed nations gave close to 120 billion U. S.  dollars in aid  to developing nations, reveals the Organisation for Economic Cooperation  and Development, a club for the rich, industrialised nations. The European Union, seen by some developing country negotiators as the  bloc that should take the lead in the climate change talks, offered a mixed  message on the issue of financing.  'We will need both public and private  financing,' said Anders Turesson, chief negotiator for Sweden, at a press  conference. 'We will have a meeting for (EU) finance ministers on October 20,' added  Turesson, who spoke on behalf of the EU at the climate talks.  'Hopefully, by  Barcelona we will have a much more elaborate message on the financing  side. 'The current pressure by the developing world for the developed world to  deliver stems from an 'action plan' that all countries agreed to during a U. N.   climate change summit in Bali in December 2007.  The summit in Indonesia  was seen as a breakthrough in environmental diplomacy, following the  agreement for the first time by the developing world to slash its own GhG  emissions on a national and voluntary basis on condition that the developed  world would fund the cost to create a green-friendly environment. But serious discussions about climate funds from the countries responsible  for the largest chunk of GhG emissions — 37 industrialised countries, the EU  and the U. S.  — had not surfaced till climate change negotiations in Accra,  Ghana, last year. 'The developed countries engaged with the developing countries on the  financial issue more seriously here.  There was a slight improvement after the  Accra meeting,' said Meena Raman, legal advisor for the Third World  Network, a regional think tank based in Penang, Malaysia.  'But you cannot  say there was much progress because of what the developing countries want  with the new financial architecture. ''It is a fight over governance and source of funding,' she told IPS.  'Barcelona  will be a make or break moment on the financial architecture. '