Ask food experts whether it is in the interest of well-fed people in wealthy  countries to fight hunger, and most will say: Yes.  But ask whether we should tell  them, and the answer you are likely to get is: maybe not. There are many reasons why people not directly affected by food insecurity  should consider it a problem, even taking moral considerations about social  justice out of the equation. The most eye-catching is that in creating desperate people, hunger becomes  a source of conflict and a threat to everyone's security.  'One of the arguments is terrorism and national security.  When you have  people living in poverty and hunger, that's a breeding ground for terrorism,'  David Dawe, senior economist at the Rome-based United Nations Food and  Agriculture Organisation (FAO) tells IPS.  'That's a strong argument. 'Josette Sheeran, head of the World Food Programme (WFP), another U. N.  food  agency based in Rome, also believes that empty stomachs feed trouble. 'A hungry world is a dangerous world,' Sheeran told reporters earlier this  year.  'Without food, people have only three options: they riot, they emigrate,  or they die.  None of these are acceptable. 'While these may indeed be 'strong arguments' for powerful states to take  action, their implications set some NGOs engaged in the war on hunger on  edge.  Some reject them outright. 'I don't buy this argument that if we don't do the right thing they'll come over  here and ruin our lives,' John Hilary, executive director of the London-based  anti-poverty group War on Want tells IPS.  'I think that's too near to the far  right and the British National Party. 'Oxfam International believes the self-interest case is valid, while harbouring  concerns that it could be twisted by groups in developed countries to block  immigration and imports from developing countries. 'It is true that it is in the developed world's interest to eradicate hunger, but I  also perceive some risks in this message,' Teresa Cavero, head of research at  Oxfam's Spanish section tells IPS.   'With the economic crisis and the temptation for greater protectionism, it  could be a double-edged sword.  For example, it could be said that by  encouraging growth in developing countries, people will have more job  opportunities in their homelands and there will be less migration.  This may  be correct in part, but it does not mean immigration is a bad thing. 'It is also true, however, that decades of taking the developed world to task  over the need to eradicate hunger as part of a quest for social justice has not  been enormously successful.  It could be argued that the developed world will only find the necessary  commitment to fighting hunger when the issue climbs to a higher position on  the political agenda.  And this may not come about unless voters in rich  countries see food insecurity as a problem that is in their self-interest to  solve. 'I'm more comfortable with the justice message, but it's right that it's in the  developed world's interest to fight hunger, and any arguments you build to  make the developed countries take action are positive,' Cavero says.  'The first thing governments and people in rich countries need to be aware of  is the reality we are confronted with.  Today we have more and more people in  hunger, and the WFP have announced the shameful figure of one billion  hungry people has been passed. ' While fear is one factor that might stir the well-fed, Dawe sees money as  another: 'On the economic level, there is a huge reservoir of potential  demand for developed world products in developing countries if people  break out of hunger and poverty. 'Cavero agrees: 'We at Oxfam are aware of the role trade can have in  economic development if it is conducted under fair rules, which is not the  case now, along with strong transparent markets.  Healthy growth would lead  to improvements in overall welfare, which is good for the South and good for  the North. 'It is in the North's interest to have a developing world that is not suffering  hunger because the whole economy suffers.  If they are free from hunger, they  can work on their own development.  But you must be free from hunger  before you can overcome poverty, and only then can you participate in the  global economy.  Hunger is a dead weight that's too heavy to allow welfare to  be achieved. 'Cavero believes that highlighting the link between food security and the  threat of climate change is another way to give developed countries an  incentive to act.  If developing countries try to eliminate poverty and hunger  by following the North's resource-energy intensive model of development,  global temperatures are set to accelerate. 'To get an agreement and action on climate change we must first make sure  the developing world, where most of the world's poverty and hunger is  concentrated among poor farming communities, is tackling food security in a  sustainable way so that we can put policies into place to avoid a global  disaster,' Cavero says.  'We must achieve this through a sustainable model of agriculture.  There is a  chance to achieve a win-win-win scenario - a win for food security, a win for  climate change, and a win for social, economic and environmental  sustainability. 'Dawe says the developed world would benefit from the contribution people  freed of food insecurity could make to science and culture. 'We're living in an interdependent world.  All knowledge is built on the  insights and contributions of others,' he says.   'The more smart people are working on a problem, whether it be AIDS or  global warming or anything else, the closer you get to finding an answer.  The  same argument applies to culture, art, music and other fields. 'Hunger and food insecurity are holding people back from reaching their own  potential and contributing to humanity's potential.  We're not as rich as we  could be and I don't mean in material terms. 'War on Want still believes the battleground should be social justice, not self- interest. 'The scandal is that many people who are producing food in rural areas  cannot afford to buy what they produce.  That's a serious condemnation of  the model we've allowed to grow,' says Hilary.  'What we need is a less exploitative model of agriculture.  Vast areas of the  developing world are being turned over to cattle grazing, or soy for cattle or  biofuels so the rich world can eat more meat and drive around in ecological  cars when the priority should be ensuring there is enough affordable food for  everyone.  'I do believe the moral case is strong and that hunger is a profound challenge  to our idea of progress.  If we thought that our privileged lives depended on  exploitation, more would be done.  It's a moral and political question. '  