While pessimism continues to dog the lead-up to next month’s climate change  talks in the Danish capital of Copenhagen, a new Philippine law aimed at  streamlining the country’s efforts to mitigate and adapt to the effects of global  warming has received a guarded welcome by environmental groups here. Brother Martin Francisco, chairperson of the Sagip (Save) Sierra Madre  Environmental Society Inc. , told IPS that the Philippine Congress had made a  positive move in passing the legislation but stressed that this was only the  initial step. 'The law itself is not the complete answer.  It’s just the beginning since many  things need to be done, especially the [formulating of the] implementing  rules and regulations that, according to the law, must be enacted by the  [Climate Change] Commission in the span of six months,' says Francisco. Besides establishing the Climate Change Commission (CCC) to set up,  monitor and coordinate action plans to prepare the country for extreme  weather events that bring about floods and landslides, the Philippine Climate  Change Act of 2009 aims to mainstream climate change mitigation into  broader government policy through a National Framework Strategy and  Programme on Climate Change. The CCC is to be chaired by President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo, who enacted  the law on Oct.  23, just weeks after two devastating tropical storms, ‘Ondoy’  and ‘Pepeng’—known internationally as ‘Ketsana’ and ‘Parma’, respectively— led to floods and landslides in metro Manila and other areas of the northern  island of Luzon, which killed around one thousand people. Although Arroyo has not held back in praising the legislation—saying it  'ushers in a new era in the way the Philippines will tackle climate change in  both the short and long terms, for the benefit of Filipinos today and Filipinos  yet unborn,' upon enacting the legislation into law—environmentalists say  that the law’s implementation will be the key to its success. 'In our Philippine experience there is this dichotomy between the law in letter  and its implementation,' says Francisco, adding that non-governmental  organisations must monitor the Climate Change Act’s implementation closely. Greenpeace Southeast Asia has also welcomed the new legislation, calling on  the CCC to formulate the Philippines’s mitigation and adaptation measures  'as a matter of urgency,' while Joey Papa, president of Filipino environment  protection group ‘Bantay Kalikasan’ (Nature Watch), warned against expecting  too much from the act 'without its correct and immediate implementation. 'Yeb Saño, head of World Wide Fund for Nature-Philippines’s climate change  and energy programme, believes that the law 'is a step in the right direction. '  But in order to be successfully implemented, he says that other laws related  to the environment also need to be enforced. It is 'important that the Philippines be serious about enforcing environmental  laws, including laws on forest, laws on fisheries, laws on solid waste, laws  that protect watersheds, otherwise the new law won’t be as effective as it  should be,' says Saño, who will be part of the official Philippine delegation— along with representatives of other NGOs—at the Copenhagen climate  conference in December.  Although the effective implementation of laws is a common concern  regarding many areas of Philippine legislation, the characteristics of the  threat that climate change poses to this nation of nearly 100 million people  has elicited particular unease. The Philippines is widely regarded as being very susceptible to the effects of  global warming.  Sea-level rises, increases in ocean temperatures, and more  frequent and intense tropical storms and typhoons are just some of the  adverse impacts that the Philippines is expected to have to deal with—or is  even dealing with already—as the earth gets hotter. While such impacts have the potential to be disastrous for the Philippines, the  effects are likely to be magnified if the country does not ready itself to cope.  Speaking at a senate committee hearing on climate change in late October,  Jerry Velasquez, a senior coordinator with the United Nations International  Strategy for Disaster Reduction body, warned that the Philippines must act to  prepare for disasters greater than the recent storms. 'The Philippines is one of the very hotspots for climate change,' said  Velasquez.  'What happened during Ondoy and Pepeng was not the worst.  The  worst is still to come. 'In a nation whose booming population already eats more rice than it is able to  grow—the Philippines imports 10 percent of its rice, the staple diet of most  Filipinos, from the likes of Vietnam and Thailand—Saño argues that food  security is the number one issue facing the Philippines when it comes to  climate change.  He says that extreme weather events will damage crops—as the recent  storms did, with rice particularly hard hit—while a change in rainfall patterns  is also already evident. 'Rain has been heavy in areas where you don’t need it [and] has been absent  where rain is badly needed,' says Saño. 'This has affected the planting and harvest seasons for famers as well as the  harvest season for fisher folk,' he told IPS. A report by the Asian Development Bank, released in April, warned that if  measures are not taken to mitigate and adapt to climate change, then rice  production in the Philippines could fall by up to 70 percent by 2020. And while the new law intends to prepare the Philippines for the adverse  effects of a warming planet, it also replaces the structures through which  climate change issues have hitherto been addressed. It abolishes previously established environmental bodies, including the  Presidential Task Force on Climate Change and the Inter-agency Committee  on Climate Change, whose functions will be incorporated under the CCC  mantle. As for mainstreaming climate change issues into other areas of government  policy, based on the new legislation, Saño says that such a requirement may  be more difficult to put into practice. 'It’s always easy to say that we are mainstreaming a certain issue into the  mandates of [government] agencies, but it’s another thing to be able to  actually see that into implementation,' he says. 