Fears that the United Nations World Food Security Summit would fail to deliver  effective measures to defeat hunger were borne out Monday when world leaders  and government officials approved a toothless declaration on the first day. The UN Food and Agriculture Organisation (FAO) is holding the three-day  summit after the number of hungry people crossed the one-billion mark for  the first time this year, meaning that almost a sixth of the global population  does not have enough to eat. Despite this, almost all of the planet's most powerful leaders, including  United States President Barack Obama, snubbed the event.  The FAO failed in  its bid to establish a target of eradicating hunger by 2025 and to get rich  countries to commit to spending 44 billion dollars a year in agricultural aid.  'It's a bit of a damp squib,' Sarah Gillam of anti-poverty organisation  ActionAid tells IPS.  'There is positive language on the right to food, promoting sustainable  agriculture and the Committee on Food Security,' she added, referring to the  FAO body which is being reformed to broaden the stakeholders involved, and  boost its role in coordinating efforts to combat hunger.  'But the declaration does not have any teeth. 'States reaffirmed their commitment to the U. N.  Millennium Development Goal  of halving the number of hungry people by 2015, and promised 'to take  action towards sustainably eradicating hunger at the earliest possible date. 'They also pledged to 'substantially increase the share of ODA (official  development assistance) devoted to agriculture and food security,' although  no target figure or timeframe was given. 'Taking out the date of 2025 for the total elimination of hunger and  cancelling the need to allocate 44 billion dollars a year to support  agriculture. . . render this declaration a document devoid of any concrete  instruments to make the fight against hunger effective,' said Sergio Marelli,  chief of the advisory panel for the parallel forum staged by NGOs from  around the world. FAO director-general Jacques Diouf insisted approval of the declaration was  a success, as the member nations have endorsed a new strategy to fight  hunger by pledging to end the long-running decline in agricultural  investment, one of the main culprits for the high levels of undernourishment,  and to focus on the plight of smallholder farmers. 'The declaration was approved this morning unanimously.  This is a good sign  for us,' Diouf told a news conference.  'I totally believe that it was a  significant step forward towards the total eradication of hunger in a  generation's time. 'However, he did not hide his disappointment about the failure to obtain  binding goals and commitments. 'I'm satisfied with the fact that we arrived at a consensus on a declaration.  I'm  satisfied also with the thrust of what is in the declaration,' he said.  'But I'm  not satisfied with the fact that some of the concrete proposals I made, based  on the fact that if we set a target we must quantify it in terms of a date, (were  not accepted).  The negotiations were not able to fix a date for the eradication  of hunger. . . There was no consensus and I regret it.  It was the same (with  agricultural aid). . .  But I was not the one who negotiated the document. 'Diouf wanted 44 billion dollars in aid for agriculture each year, primarily to  enable smallholder farmers in developing countries to feed themselves as  well as helping the world achieve the goal of increasing food production by 70  percent to meet the needs of a population likely to reach 9. 1 billion by 2050. The FAO argues that much of this money could come from raising the share  for agriculture in ODA, which totalled 119. 8 billion dollars in 2008, to 18-19  percent from the current level of around five percent. This money is needed to increase farmers' access to irrigation systems,  modern machinery, seeds and fertilisers, as well as improving rural  infrastructure and roads so they can obtain the inputs they need and take  their goods to market. They also need help to adapt their practices to climate change, with impacts  in terms of falling yields and extreme weather expected to hit developing  countries hardest, especially in sub-Saharan Africa and South Asia.     'This summit announced a new strategy to tackle hunger by focusing on the  poorest farmers - but it is un-costed, unfunded and unaccountable,' said  Oxfam's Gawain Kriple.  'The sentiment is honourable but that alone does not  put food on a billion empty plates. 'Italian Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi said the meeting built on progress  made at July's G8 summit in L'Aquila, when the world's top economic powers  promised 20 billion dollars in aid over three years to help farmers in  developing nations grow and sell food. 'At the G8 summit we defined the principles of a global partnership (for  agriculture, food security and nutrition) that unites all private and public  forces for food security to form a winning strategy, the success of which  everyone can and should contribute to,' said Berlusconi, the only leader of a  G8 country to come. 'This awareness has already started. . . to translate into deeds.  Now there is the  concrete willingness of everyone to pursue with tenacity and the right tools  the goal of guaranteeing hundreds of millions of human beings dignity,  freedom and hope, as well as nutrition. ' Developing nations were concerned that the eloquent talk would not be  followed up by action and that their food sovereignty could be threatened. 'We are pleased that this conference has centred on such an important  problem,' Ecuador's agriculture minister Dr.  Ramon Espinel tells IPS.  'But we  think that what has been declared is not enough, even though some  contributions are in the right direction, such as the 20 billion from the  L'Aquila summit. 'We think this is not enough because it may stay just a declaration.  If we  follow the path of what has happened before, this (money) may come as food  aid, which is not what our countries need. 'We need agricultural aid to build the capacity to produce our own food; aid  that is managed by the countries themselves within their own policies.  We  don't want to have programmes that are built and directed from foreign  areas.  This is the important thing we feel is lacking. 'Some reports have claimed that less than a quarter of the money the G8  promised will actually be new, and ActionAid said the failure to set up a  mechanism that monitors whether such pledges are respected is another  major let-down. 'We need a bit of transparency.  No one knows how much money is given and  how much money is new,' Gillam says.  'So we need accountability for people  to have faith in the process. 'The nations' refusal to commit to eradicating hunger by 2025 may in part be  down to the fact that this commitment might sound hollow given that the  target of halving hunger by 2015, first set at the 1996 Food Summit in Rome  when around 825 million did not have enough to eat, is unlikely to be  reached.  Indeed, the world has moved in the opposite direction, with some 100 million  people joining the ranks of the hungry this year alone because of the effects  of the financial crisis and of still high food costs after the 2007-08 spike in  the price of staples like wheat and rice. One of the most hotly awaited speeches was that of Pope Benedict XVI, who  criticised speculation in food commodities that contributed to the soaring  prices, and said hunger can only be beaten by tackling poverty and social  injustice. 'There is a continuing disparity in the level of development within and among  nations that leads to instability in many parts of the world, accentuating the  contrast between poverty and wealth,' the Pontiff said. 'If the aim is to eliminate hunger, international action is needed not only to  promote balanced and sustainable economic growth and political stability,  but also to seek out new parameters - primarily ethical but also juridical and  economic ones - capable of inspiring the degree of cooperation required to  build a relationship of parity between countries at different stages of  development. 'Hunger is the most cruel and concrete sign of poverty.  Opulence and waste  are no longer acceptable when the tragedy of hunger is assuming ever  greater proportions. ' 