Ask any Sri Lankan, and he or she will cringe at the mention of ‘water hyacinth’,  infamous in the country, where it is called by its more common Sri Lankan name  ‘Japan Jabbara’.  The weed-like water plant has spread across the island, and  everyone knows its potential to take over any watery home in double quick time. Its history is long but nasty on this island state.  It first arrived in the country  in the company of dignitaries in 1901, when the wife of the then Colonial  British Governor, Lady Blake, brought it to Sri Lanka.  She, according to  environmentalist and lawyer Jagath Gunewardena, sought the help of the  main botanical garden to grow the seeds.  'Then it spread.  I guess everyone wanted to keep the plant that was brought  by the governor’s wife,' Gunewardena told IPS.  A century after it has been  tagged as the worst weed invasion on the island, a protective law, called  Water Hyacinth Act, was enacted to prohibit not only the entry of the plant  after which it was named but all other alien plants into the country. Water hyacinth, with its thick green leaves and bushy roots, has spread all  over the island, and no one has come up with a proper method to stop its  menacing spread. 'That was how it came here,' said Sajeewa Chamikara, the coordinator of Sri  Lanka Environmentalists Association (SLEA), which lobbies for tougher  environment protection laws and carries out national environmental  awareness programmes.  'Now it has spread all over the island. 'The plant now covers acres of waterways, paddy lands and marshes, making  it impossible for other plants to survive and blocking sunlight out, which in  turn makes it difficult for fish to survive.  'It is the worst case of an invasive plant alien to the ecosystem that we have  had,' Chamikara said.  Problems posed by alien plants do not stop with the  commonly known water hyacinth, according Chamikara and other  environmentalists.  It is but the start.  There are many that have followed Lady Blake’s infamous import, and are  wrecking havoc on the island’s ecosystem.  Gunewardena estimates that there  could be as many as 40 alien plants that are spreading fast on the island.  To  make matters worse, no concrete measures have been taken to stop the  spread and to stem the arrival of new environment-threatening plants.  'What happens is that most of these plants arrive in the country through  humans; the majority are brought here as ornamental plants.  People have no  sense that a plant looking nice may not fit into our ecosystem; worse it could  harm it,' Chamikara said.  When the plants either grow out of control or  become popular, within no time they take over vast areas and damage the  ecosystem.  'They arrive as ornamental plants, but once they start growing fast, people  just take them off and throw them, then they grow wherever they land,' said  Gunewardena.  Chamikara takes the example of another alien invader plant, ‘Kaha Deya Para’  (with no known English name), which is spreading fast in the wetlands.  The  plant has spread so fast that near the town of Rathnapura, located some 100  kilometres from Colombo, there is a large stretch of land covered entirely by  it.  'It can suck out the nutrients from the soil very fast, making it difficult for  other plants (to live),' Chamikara says.  That is not the only problem caused  by the pesky invader—its preferred haunt is near waterways, and neither the  plant nor discarded stems and leaves decay quickly.  'They can block the  waterways; there is also the real threat of flash floods aside from the long- term environmental damage they can cause,' Chamikara said.  The plant is  spreading rapidly in the districts of Colombo, Kegalle and Rathnapura, across  the slopes of the central hills.  Environmentalists lament that lack of public knowledge of the plant and its  huge impact on the local ecosystem has led humans to become an unwitting  tool in its spread, that is, by using it to erect fences. Another such case is that of ‘Koster's Curse’, a perennial or highly invasive  shrub, which was introduced as an ornamental plant from South America.  It  has rapidly spread in the plains.  According to Chamikara the plant grows like a bush, blocking sunlight from  other plants below it.  'Its spread threatens indigenous plants that grow in the  same areas,' he said.  There are also fears that the rapid spread of the shrub  could harm the ecological balance as well as threaten wild life like elephants.  One alien plant, called ‘Kaha Karabu’, is suspected have grown so thick in the  deep south of the island, blocking traditional elephant paths that earth- moving machines have to be used to get rid of it.  Environmentalists argue that while they have been battling the spread of  century-old enemies like the water hyacinth, slack implementation of laws  has resulted in more such plants entering the island.  Gunewardena faults the  Department of Agriculture for enforcing the law strictly against agricultural  weeds while being lax on ornamental plants. 'We have a long-running case where we have been trying to get a plant  known as ‘Valentine’ banned, but we lack support from the agriculture  authorities,' he told IPS.  The plant that blooms in February—hence its name— is considered an invasive plant of the highest priority on the Hawaiian islands,  but can still be brought into Sri Lanka relatively easily as an ornamental plant.  Chamikara of the SLEA aid that authorities should find ways to use invasive  plants in a profitable manner.  He believes that the spread could be fast and  wide when it happens in the wild.  'If you can promote the use of these plants  as fertiliser or animal feed, the people tend to be in charge of the growth,  and you can monitor the spread. 'Gunewardena told IPS that alien plants make it into the ecosystem due to the  lack of public knowledge.  'It is not something that you can do fast; you have  to educate the public, especially children, on the harm these plants can cause.   Awareness and proper implementation of laws can help stem this spread. 'Without these, there are bound to be more water hyacinth-like menaces to  the environment.   