Africa, the continent already most affected by hunger and food scarcity, is likely  to see its woes increased due to climate change and the changing rain patterns  it provokes, experts and scientists say. According to data gathered by the German Institute for Meteorology and  Climate Research, variability in the rain patterns in Africa, especially in the  Western region, has substantially increased since the early 1980s. Harald Kunstmann, director of the institute, says that while in the Sahel  region the drought that set in through the 1970s and 1980s has not radically  changed, in the Volga delta region the yearly rain precipitation amount  remains constant as a whole, but now follows erratic patterns. For the Volga delta, 'we have observed a small increase in rain amount of  some five percent per year,' Kunstmann, a researcher in climate change and  terrestrial hydrology, told IPS.  At the same time, 'there is a drastic decrease  of rain in April, the month that marks the transition from the dry to the rainy  season in the area,' he said. This decrease at times reaches up to 70 percent of precipitation. Another observed phenomenon in the Volta region during the last 40 years is  the shortening of the rainy season, and a delay of its beginning of up to 30  days. 'Global warming changes the traditional fresh water circuit,' Kunstmann told  IPS.  Higher average temperatures lead to higher humidity in the air, and thus  to more intensive rain, but also to faster evaporation and condensation.   'Consequences of such changes in the fresh water circuits are more frequent  floods and longer and more intensive droughts,' Kunstmann said. For agriculture, such erratic weather has dramatic consequences.  Both floods  and drought destroy seeds and fields, abnormal weather forces changes in  the farmers' plantation schedules and routines. Such changes are confirmed already both by farmers in Africa, and by  researchers in the industrialised world. Namanga Ngongi, a farmer from Cameroon, and president of the Alliance for  a Green Revolution in Africa (AGRA), told a recent conference on agriculture  and climate change in Salzburg, Austria, that 'global warming is already  destroying African agriculture.  There are more and more frequent droughts,  more frequent floods, and also more destruction,' he said. This destruction of agriculture through climate change adds to the increasing  hunger already present in numerous African countries. According to the World Hunger Index, as measured by the Washington-based  International Food Policy Research Institute (IFPRI), since 1990 hunger  increased drastically in nine African countries: In the Democratic Republic of  Congo, hunger increased by 67 percent, in Swaziland by 32 percent, in  Guinea Bissau, Zimbabwe, Burundi, and Liberia by 19, 18, 17 and 16 percent  respectively. In that period, Egypt was the only African country able to substantially reduce  food scarcity and hunger.  All other successful developing countries were  either East Asian, Arab, or Latin American nations. The German non-governmental organisation Welthungerhilfe (World Hunger  Aid) arrived at similar conclusions.  According to its 2009 World Hunger Index,  in at least 28 countries, mostly in the Sub Saharan region, hunger reaches  'serious, even very serious dimensions,' the report says. World Hunger Aid also ranks the Democratic Republic of Congo as the  country with the worst results in the fight against hunger, followed by  Burundi, Eritrea, Sierra Leone, Chad, and Ethiopia. Other than climate change and war, incorrect policy tools are at the root of  the failure to combat hunger, said Michael Windfuhr, of the German church  organisation Brot fuer die Welt (Bread for the World).  'State budgets for  agriculture in most African state have been reduced by some 50 percent in  the last 20 years,' Windfuhr told IPS.  'But also international cooperation and  development aid has moved away from supporting local food production in  developing countries. 'Furthermore, wrong agricultural policies have damaged the soil in many  African countries, making it more susceptible to erosion, and reducing  farming yields, Windfuhr added. 'To make things worse, subsidies for agriculture in Europe and North America  and increasing export of these highly subsidised agricultural goods to  developing countries have crowded out local food production,' he pointed  out. In contrast, some developing countries, such as Brazil, have shown how to  combat hunger successfully, Windfuhr said.  'By financially supporting poor  families engaged in small-sized agriculture, Brazil has been able since 2003  to help some 20 million people to escape from poverty,' he said. But, from the climate change point of view, Brazil is also target of criticism for  allowing the mass eroding of tropical forest in the Amazon region, for large  agriculture purposes, especially for the breeding of cattle. In its recent ‘Climate Change: Impact on Agriculture and Costs of Adaptation’  report, updated Nov.  6, the IFPRI also calls attention to the extreme  vulnerability of agriculture to climate change. 'Higher temperatures eventually reduce yields of desirable crops while  encouraging weed and pest proliferation,' Gerald Nelson, leading author of  the report, told IPS.  'Changes in precipitation patterns increase the likelihood  of short-run crop failures and long-run production declines. 'IFPRI says that, 'Although there will be gains in some crops in some regions  of the world, the overall impacts of climate change on agriculture are  expected to be negative, threatening global food security. 'In its report, IFPRI calls attention to local specificities of crop and livestock  productivity, market access, and the effects of climate.  It urges international  development agencies and national governments 'to ensure that technical,  financial, and capacity-building support reaches local communities. 'Another IFPRI recommendation is to strengthen collection and dissemination  of data.  Regular, repeated observations of the surface of the earth via remote  sensing are critical, George Nelson said. 'Funding for national statistical programs should be increased so that they  can fulfil the task of monitoring global change,' the report points out.   'Understanding agriculture/climate interactions well enough to support  adaptation and mitigation activities based on land use requires major  improvements in data collection, dissemination, and analysis. 'This is something the German Institute for Meteorology and Climate Research  is already doing.  Harald Kunstmann and his institute have modelled computer  weather forecasts for Cameroon and neighbouring countries that take into  consideration the changing rain patterns in the area. These models are the basis for new yearly schedules for ploughing and  sowing, which would heed the changing weather calendars, and adapt old  agricultural traditions to global warming-induced erratic rain patterns. 