He is well known as India’s ‘glacier man’, but for 74-year-old retired  government civil engineer, Chewang Norphel, accolades have made little dent in  his quiet determination to build more high-altitude water conservation systems,  or ‘artificial glaciers’, to beat the lack of water from receding Himalayan  glaciers. Over 70 percent of water in Ladakh district, India’s northernmost state of  Jammu and Kashmir, is sourced in springtime from the melting snows off  glaciers, and is the sole source of water for irrigation for its remote mountain  communities.  But in recent years, climate change and rising temperatures have resulted in  decreasing snowfall in the upper-reach ‘accumulation’ zones of these  glaciers, leading to reduced waters in the springtime.  A survey of 20 villages and 211 individuals over 65 years of age by the French  non-governmental Groupe Energies Renouvelables, Environnement et  Solidarités (GERES), showed over 90 percent of the respondents saying that  winters were now warmer.  Meteorological data from 1973 onwards analysed by GERES—which in English  stands for Committee for the Environment and Sustainable Development— showed a rise of one degree centigrade in the winter months in Ladakh,  coupled with a sharp decline in snowfall and an equally sharp increase in  mean summer temperatures in July, August and September.  The changing temperatures have already begun impacting the region’s  biodiversity and its communities, says the international organisation,  Worldwide Fund for Nature (WWF). 'The breeding of the bar-headed goose and the black-necked crane is not  on schedule in recent years,' says Nisa Khatoon, project officer of WWF at  Leh.  'And migration routes of communities on the Tsokar lake [who weave  the famous Pashmina shawls] have become more frequented as these pastoral  communities migrate due to degrading pastures. ' In Leh, Ladakh’s capital city, Norphel quietly refutes claims, the latest by  India’s Ministry of Environment and Forest, that there is insufficient scientific  data to prove that India’s glaciers are receding. 'I am the scientific data,' quips Norphel.  'I have seen, for instance, the size of  the Khardung La glacier—a high mountain pass in the Ladakh region, with an  elevation of 5,359 metres above sea level—since I was a child: it was solid ice  then,' he explains.  The Khardung La glacier is one example of Ladakh’s melting glaciers, barely  recognisable now as a glacier.  'Four to five decades ago, there were so many glaciers you could see from  Leh,' Norphel tells IPS, responding to the ministry’s refutation of receding  glaciers.  'Now you can’t even see small ones anymore. 'Norphel, a retired rural development engineer for Kashmir state, says the  water problems faced by Ladakh’s impoverished villages bothered him as  much as the 'wasting' of water in winter, from taps that are left running to  avoid pipes freezing and bursting.  'I noticed from my garden tap that the water would freeze where it flowed,  so that’s where I got the idea of designing artificial glaciers that would freeze  extra water in winter, melting just in time for sowing crops in April and May,'  says this unassuming, quiet man.  In November, trickling glacial streams are diverted and made to flow down  nearby slopes through channels and outlets with 1. 5-inch diameter pipes  installed every five feet.  Stone embankments built at regular intervals impede the flow of this water,  making shallow pools down the mountain slope, which fill up gradually and  freeze almost instantly in winter, forming a thick glacier-like sheet of ice  over the slope that Norphel calls 'artificial glacier. ' So far, Norphel has helped build 10 artificial glaciers, all near villages whose  communities have helped construct and maintain them.  In Stakna village,  some 35 kilometres from Leh, 60-year-old Tashi Tundup is happy with the  ‘Stakna glacier’.   Meetings are arranged in the village to discuss village history of water, its  availability in their nearby stream during peak winter time and the location of  shade along the stream’s course, where pools can be constructed to help  freeze the water faster in the absence of direct winter sunlight. Since the water is equally distributed to all in the village, sustainability of  water-harvesting structures is ensured, says Norphel.  Norphel also dispels scientists’ criticism of his ‘artificial glaciers’ as not being  glaciers.  'What matters is that these artificial glaciers serve similar water  conservation and harvesting techniques as glaciers,' says Norphel.  Norphel hopes to build two more such glaciers at Stakna village, holding two  million cubic feet of iced water for its 700 residents. 'We get water as early as April itself (instead of melting glacier water in June),  and this has helped the wheat crop.  Wheat production has gone up over the  last five years because of the water from the artificial glacier, and I can now  also grow potatoes and peas,' says Tundup of Stakna. Norphel lists several other benefits: groundwater and spring recharge,  significant increase in cash-crop farming, fuel, livestock fodder and  livelihood incomes, mitigation of climate change for humans and livestock  and ecological benefits to soil conservation. He says the benefits of simulated glaciers have been confirmed by village folk  and responses gathered over the last ten years.  The artificial glacier system can be replicated, says Norphel, in similar geo- climatic zones in central Asian countries such as Kyrgyztan and Kazakhstan.  'The problem is, it is difficult to find labour for maintenance work in the  severe winter,' says Norphel.  'And the remoteness of these high-altitude  systems makes transportation of materials very expensive. 'In 1987, the first artificial glacier built by Norphel cost 1,580 euros (2,347  U. S.  dollars) in Phuktse Phu village in Ladakh district.  The latest plan by  Norphel and the Leh Nutrition Project, a Britain-based non-governmental  organisation, to construct five more comes at a total cost of 47,216. 50 U. S.   dollars, which is still just a fourth of the cost of concrete cement  constructions for water conservation reservoirs, despite Norphel’s claims of  high costs. 'We use mostly locally available stones and material,' says Norphel.  The  Indian Army—which has a heavy presence in Ladakh district due to its close  proximity to China and Pakistan—and India’s scientific and technology  department financed constructions of artificial glaciers in 2008 up to this  year, but Norphel says he needs help from other sources too. 'I can do so much better if I have some more funds,' he says.  