For a long time, activists had believed that rainforests in the vast northwest  Borneo state of Sarawak were being logged unsustainably, rapidly making way  for tree (acacia) plantations, oil palm plantations, dams and secondary growth.   But few listened. Their position was confirmed when the country’s auditor-general presented  to Parliament last month its 2008 annual report criticising forestry  management in Malaysia's largest state as 'unsatisfactory'.  Earlier this month  Sarawak state authorities denied the auditor-general’s findings. The report produced a host of findings to back up its conclusion: depleted  permanent forest reserves had not been replaced while some proposed forest  reserves had not yet been gazetted.  There was also no compulsory  requirement for all logging license holders to obtain approved environment  impact assessment reports before proceeding.  Annual cut rates had been  exceeded, if all forests were taken into account. It noted that poor enforcement and monitoring had led to illegal logging and  contributed to environmental degradation, especially river pollution, erosion,  landslides, mud deposits and floods. Sarawak's Second Minister of Planning and Resource Management Awang  Tengah Ali Hassan (the First Minister is long-serving Sarawak Chief Minister  Taib Mahmud) expressed unhappiness with the report.  He said it did not  reflect the overall situation as the auditors made random conclusions about  the long-term management of the state's forests. 'By taking the feedback of the Sarawak Forestry Department, I believe a more  balanced and accurate perspective (on the state's forest management) will be  registered,' he was reported as saying by national news agency Bernama. Awang Tengah claimed the auditor-general's department did not have the  forestry management expertise, and information by the state forestry  department was not taken into account in the audit report.  He said the  auditor-general had written to him on Oct.  29 and had agreed to take into  account feedback from the forestry department. When contacted, a spokesperson at the auditor-general’s department in  Putrajaya said the matter has been 'resolved'—the department is accepting a  commentary from Sarawak authorities but the auditor-general's report still  stands. Senior officials at the Sarawak Planning and Resource Management Ministry  and the forestry department could not be reached over the phone for  comment at press time. Sarawak has 12. 4 million hectares of forest within its 124,450 square  kilometres of territory, of which 4. 6 million ha are permanent reserves, 0. 88  million ha are fully protected and 4. 30 million are state government forests,  with the remainder being used for settlements, towns and agriculture. Earlier this year, the state government announced a target of six million  hectares of permanent forest reserve and one million hectares as totally  protected areas for national parks, wild life sanctuaries and natural forest  reserves.  This was described as 'clear testimony of the State commitment at  sustainable forest management. 'The state also announced the establishment of Transboundary Conservation  Areas with Indonesia and Brunei encompassing national parks and a wildlife  sanctuary.  Sarawak has also endorsed 33 forestry-related international  treatises such as the Convention on Biological Diversity, the Kyoto Protocol,  the Convention of International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna  and Flora and the ASEAN Agreement on Conservation of Nature and Natural  Resources. But Raymond Abin, the coordinator of the Sarawak Conservation Action  Network— a coalition of environmental and indigenous rights groups in  Sarawak—is not convinced. Logging is big business in Sarawak: it is the world’s largest exporter of  tropical hardwood.  It does not help that timber concessions are granted to  well-connected parties.  Oil palm is another major source revenue.  'We don’t have to go far if you see what is happening to most of the rivers in  Sarawak, they are all muddy.  If you fly from one end to the other, you can see  many areas where the forests are being logged,' said Abin. For all the Sarawak government’s efforts, the auditor-general’s report noted  that 139,680 ha of permanent reserves were lost between 2003 and 2005,  with another 18,322 ha depleted during the period 2006-2008.  Between  1990 and 2008, close to a million hectares of permanent forest reserve had  been lost, with only 4. 6 million hectares remaining.  The report noted the  state government's announcement of its targeted six million ha of permanent  reserve, but pointed out there was no indication when this target would  become official. Auditors found that 'logging activity near rivers is one of the main factors for  deterioration in turbidity, total suspended solids and dissolved oxygen levels'  in the main rivers of Sarawak.  'This not only pollutes water resources but  requires huge costs to restore,' said Abin.  Indeed, the Rejang River (Sibu,  Sarikei and Kapit regions), Kemena River (Bintulu), Baram River (Miri), Limbang  River (Limbang) and Trusan Lawas River (Limbang) have exceeded acceptable  water pollution standards. Abin added that the indigenous groups could see what is happening around.   'You don't need to be an expert: the local people who have been living in the  forest or depending on the water for their means of survival—their way of  life/livelihood is being gradually destroyed by the logging. 'Auditors noted large deposits at the mouth of the Seduan River and Igan River  in Sibu 'as large as a football field,' which it said caused frequent floods in  the Sibu area during heavy rains.  According to flood records, Sibu recorded a  flood level of 0. 9 metres in 1997 rising to 1. 5 m in 2007.  In December 2008,  Sibu experienced its worst floods since 1963.  The Sibu division of Sarawak  had lost over 350,000 ha in permanent forest reserves between 1990 and  2008, the auditors recorded. They also cited press reports earlier this year that logging activities in Bakun  exceeding 40,000 ha had led to severe pollution and deposits at the mouth of  the Balui River. The law requires an environmental impact assessment to be prepared for all  licenses in logging areas exceeding 500 ha before logging can commence.   But in a sample of 30 permits of areas exceeding 500 ha, the auditors were  unable to verify that EIA reports had been prepared before work began.   Neither could they find any EIA approvals relating to those permits. Air surveillance revealed that logging in certain areas had been carried out on  slopes exceeding the 45-degree slope threshold allowed and close to  riverbanks.  The auditors warned that Sarawak’s rich biodiversity would be gradually  destroyed as a result of logging activities.  It called for full records on flora  and fauna species so that restoration work could be properly undertaken for  threatened species. One of the problems is poor enforcement and insufficient forest rangers,  which Awang Tengah said was an 'old episode' as corrective and  improvement action had been taken. But Abin belied his claim, saying that fear of harassment deters people from  lodging complaints.  'They cannot deny that there are a lot of illegal logging  activities going on.  The problem lies with the authorities, the people who  have the power, because of their lack of enforcement. '