China, the world’s biggest emitter of greenhouse gases, has stolen a march over  the rest of Asia in unilaterally declaring its carbon intensity cuts a day after  President Barack Obama did late last month for the U. S. The U. S.  has proposed a 17 percent cut below 2005 levels by 2020—less than  one-seventh of what the European Union has committed.  India, the fifth  largest emitter, was forced to fall in line, so as not to be seen as recalcitrant. Both China and India have toed the U. S.  approach in citing their voluntary  reductions from 2005 levels, whereas the Kyoto Protocol regime has  stipulated emission cuts from 1990.  This puts China’s offer of reducing its  carbon intensity by 40 to 45 percent by 2020 and India’s 20 to 25 percent in  a different perspective.  Since emissions have been rising in these two giant economies between 1990  and 2005, the reductions are not so ambitious and do not deviate that much  from business as usual.  China has also taken the lead in cobbling together a new BASIC coalition— consisting of Brazil, South Africa, India and China.  The four have listed their  'non-negotiable' demands: no legally binding cuts, unsupported mitigation  actions, international monitoring of unsupported mitigation actions and use  of climate as a trade barrier.  They threaten to walk out of the United Nations  climate change December conference in Copenhagen if industrial countries  browbeat them.  Reportedly, China’s Premier Wen Jiabao summoned India’s Environment  Minister, Jairam Ramesh, who was in Beijing in late November, to an  unscheduled meeting and told him that China planned to lead the developing  world in presenting a united front against the West.  He was literally given a  night to read the BASIC draft and sign on the dotted line. This is a far cry from the precursor to Copenhagen, the U. N.  Earth Summit in  Rio de Janeiro in 1992, when India represented G77 developing countries  (now increased to 130).  India’s Environment Minister at the time, Kamal Nath,  baited the U. S. , led by President George Bush, Sr.  The White House was so  incensed that it admonished then Indian Prime Minister Narasimha Rao, who  had to tone down his rhetoric at the summit.  India has tied itself in knots on its stand on climate.  Prime Minister  Manmohan Singh agreed to abide by the two degrees Celsius cap on rise in  global temperatures at the Group of Eight wealthiest nations meetings in Italy  in July.  Indian negotiators criticised him for compromising India’s future growth  prospects.  Subsequently, Ramesh wrote a letter to the Prime Minister, leaked  to the media, suggesting India offer voluntary cuts in emissions and subject  these to international verification.  This triggered off a political furore in India,  prompting him to retract his letter.  China, by contrast, is consistent in its  policy. 'India is a leader of the developing world,' says Sunita Narain, director of the  Centre for Science and Environment in New Delhi.  'It should campaign for the  voice of the marginalised and victims of climate change. 'She adds: 'India should avoid sitting at the high table with polluters (rich  countries).  Therefore, we have to put pressure on the North to take effective  emission cuts.  That will be a real leadership role. 'On Dec.  3, when India announced its policy, Qin Gang, the spokesperson of  China's Ministry of Foreign Affairs, reiterated that China and India were  developing countries and victims of climate change.  China understood the  Indian situation on climate change and would support India's adaptation and  mitigation plan that was based on its own national situation and capacity. However, there are vast differences between the two countries.  Between 1990  and 2005, per capita energy use increased by half in China—three times  more than in India.  Jairam himself has referred to China’s carbon intensity— the amount of carbon emitted per 1,000 U. S.  dollars of GDP— 2. 8 tonnes as  against India’s one tonne.  As Huo Weiya of the independent online publication ‘Chinadialogue’ in Beijing  observes: 'Three decades of economic growth have given the Chinese  citizenry ample material desires; a lifestyle has by now taken root that hopes  to keep up with the rich, particularly to keep up with the Americans. 'Some Chinese and Indian experts are uneasy about their countries unilaterally  offering carbon intensity cuts.  Qi Jianguo, a researcher at the Chinese  Academy of Social Sciences, believes that the targets would put 'great  pressure' on China's development.  Before India announced its policy, Sunita Narain, who is also a member of the  Prime Minister’s Council on Climate Change, warned: 'There needs to be a  proper deliberative process if India needs a carbon or energy intensity  number.  That has still not been done.  It must not make a laughing stock of  itself by announcing new numbers every day; it should stick to its own 20  percent by 2020 domestic commitment. ' She alleged that India’s changing position reflected U. S.  interests, not its own.   'It is clearly at the behest of the U. S.  president.  It will derail the multilateral  negotiations,' she said.  * Darryl D’Monte is president of the International Federation of Environmental  Journalists.  