With low carbon seen as the new buzzword for government promotion and  backed by Beijing as the new economic growth engine, China is poised for a  green leap forward.    But the political overtones of the drive and the zeal of local governments  jumping on the low carbon bandwagon have raised concerns that the new  green campaign may result in overcapacity, worsening China’s frictions with  its trade partners.    As world leaders get together this week in Copenhagen to discuss the earth’s  low carbon future, China is facing warnings that its expansion into green  energy may have trespassed certain boundaries. Last week the European Chamber of Commerce in China warned Beijing on  threat of trade backlash.  A report issued by the European business group said  Beijing’s huge stimulus measures to revive the economy have aggravated the  problem of overcapacity, which may result in a new surge of cheap exports.   The chamber cited expansion in the wind power equipment as one of the  sectors facing severe over-capacity. In another development, the United Nations stopped approving aid for  Chinese wind-power projects, pending determination whether they qualified  unfairly.  The ‘Financial Times’ reported that the U. N.  stopped accrediting Chinese  wind farms this summer on concern that government subsidies were cut to  make them eligible for the international body’s Clean Development  Mechanism, which allows developed countries extending financing and/or  technologies for greenhouse gas (GHG)-reducing projects to developing  countries to earn credits for their GHG reduction efforts.  But even before the international community and businesses raised voices of  concern, Chinese leaders have begun worrying that the new drive for clean  energy is creating an overcapacity that may become a long-term burden for  the country. In July the National Planning and Development Commission, the state top  planner, released a circular cautioning against new overheating of the  economy.  Last month, the State Council, China’s cabinet, announced it was  taking measures to limit capacity increases in seven sectors. 'It is not only Beijing that has a low-carbon plan but all 32 provinces in China  have their own plans, and sometimes those are more ambitious than the  national projects,' says Wu Changhua, Greater China director for Climate  Group, a Britain-based non-profit organisation.  'They don’t seem to realise  that it is not enough just to produce the technology and get the clean energy  but that you should be also able to deploy it. 'A low-carbon expo held in Nanchang, the capital of Jiangxi, one of China’s  central provinces, last month gave a glimpse of how local governments were  vying to embrace the new low-carbon concept.  During the expo Jiangxi provincial government announced that it was  cooperating with the Finish government on building a low-carbon eco-city in  Gongqing city by the Poyang lake, China’s largest freshwater lake.  The city,  also dubbed DigiEcoCity, was being planned by a Finish company of the same  name, and it was the envy of all other localities. 'The drive for green economy has become totally politicised,' said one of the  expo participants who spoke on condition of anonymity.  'Every single  provincial representative at the expo was courting the Finish architect and  inviting him to choose their province to be the next setting for a DigiEcoCity. ' The Finish company has agreed to build another eco-city in east China’s  Jiangsu province and has been negotiating with Beijing and Shanghai for more  eco-city plans, according to the state Xinhua news agency. 'Having one (such city) is regarded now as a thing of political prestige,' said  the participant. Chinese officials have also approached British businesses for cooperation on  building eco-cities with intention to have a score of green model dwellings in  China twinned with similar eco-development projects in Britain.   'The danger here is that many (cadres) are following a political momentum  but their regions have no facilities and skills to support the implementation of  new green projects,' Zhang Yongwei, researcher with a leading think tank  under the State Council, told the ‘China Times’ last month. Zhang cited a survey carried out by a working group of the National People’s  Congress on how stimulus money pledged by Beijing was utilised by four  provinces.  The survey published in late October revealed that only 2. 2  percent of the entire amount slotted for investment in technology innovation  had been used to that end. 'The central government has said it will support low-carbon economy in a  big way, but the implementation on local levels is patchy because many places  lack the fundraising capacities and strong enterprises needed to sustain  green development', Zhang from the Development Research Centre of the  State Council said. The development of wind power is a case in point.  In May this year China  increased its goal for wind power generation capacity by the year 2020 to as  much as 100 gigawatts, from the 30 GW that the central government had set  18 months before. A report by the Global Wind Energy Council in the summer predicted that  China would emerge as the biggest growth market for wind power generating  capacity this year, ahead of the United States. But the wind power sector remains ridden with controversies as government  officials seem more interested in meeting capacity targets than ensuring that  the generated power flows into the grid.  Many installed turbines have been  left idle as suppliers have found that power distribution networks were not up  to the task of feeding the power to the grid. Suspicions that Beijing has cut wind power subsidies in order for some  projects to qualify for carbon credits and meet green energy targets appear to  underpin the U. N.  decision publicised last week to stop approving new wind  power projects from China.  