Twelve years after the climate change meetings in Kyoto, a much changed U. S.   will show up at the Copenhagen conference this week, and, following recent  developments in Washington, their ability to offer and agree to international  climate actions has likely never been higher. Friday, President Barack Obama announced he was moving his visit to  Copenhagen to Dec.  18, the last day of talks, when most of the other heads of  state will make their appearances, and when final agreements are traditionally  reached. Monday, the U. S.  Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) announced that it  has found greenhouse gases constitute a danger to public health and welfare,  an announcement that would allow it to regulate them even without  congressional legislation on the issue.  No climate bill is expected to be  passed before the early spring, at the earliest. 'Obviously this is a critical step… I think it will add a bit of a boost to the  negotiations in the sense that it provides more clarity,' said Jake Schmidt of  the National Resources Defence Council from Copenhagen on Monday.  'But  clearly we still need Senate action and that is essential for dealing with this  challenge. 'He added: 'The U. S.  is sending not just a big delegation but a very influential  delegation' to Copenhagen, commenting that this delegation - it includes  four cabinet secretaries as well as executive agency officials, congressmen,  the negotiating team and, briefly, the president himself - is 'unprecedented. 'The U. S. ’s negotiating position and mandate has strengthened slowly but  steadily over the last month. On Nov.  15, it was announced that the U. S.  and other countries attending the  U. N. ’s climate summit in Copenhagen would scale back their goal for the  conference from a binding accord to a political agreement that merely sets a  path toward reaching a binding accord in the next year.  Though the  announcement was not a surprise, disappointment rippled through  supporters of climate action in the U. S. Then, on the Nov.  25, the White House announced Obama would stop by  Copenhagen on Dec.  9 with U. S.  emissions reduction targets in hand.  The  disappointment receded slightly, but many activists and campaigners wished  the president was not going at such an early, inconsequential stage of the  negotiations. China announced their targets the next day.  Speaking to reporters last week,  though, the Union of Concerned Scientist’s Alden Meyer told reporters, 'The  level of ambition is too low… The lower expectations for the outcome of  Copenhagen is also not so good. ''Whether you will have the political will to complete a legally binding treaty  after ministers and delegations go home is an open question,' he added. Daniel Lashoff, of the Natural Resources Defence Council, said at the time  that the China and U. S.  commitments are 'serious' and that 'they move the  ball. ''In both cases, China and the U. S.  should be doing more, but what they’ve  proposed in terms of being able to achieve it is realistic,' he said.  'And at the  end of the day it’s what countries do, not what they say, that matters. 'Then, three days ago, Obama announced he would attend the conference on  the last, critical day of meetings.  This was followed Monday afternoon - 7pm  Copenhagen time - by the EPA announcement. Speaking to reporters at EPA headquarters before heading out to Copenhagen  herself on Wednesday, EPA Administrator Lisa Jackson said, 'These long- overdue findings cement 2009’s place in history as the year when the United  States government began addressing the challenge of greenhouse-gas  pollution and seizing the opportunity of clean-energy reform. ''In the last two months, we have done more to address global warming than  in the last eight years,' she added. Commenting on what this and other U. S.  domestic action means for the  prospects of substantive progress in Copenhagen, Oxfam America’s David  Waskow said from Copenhagen, 'There was a lot of concern when the  economic crisis first hit that it would cannibalise the climate momentum, but  we saw very quickly that there was a drive to kill two birds with one stone and  focus on a green recovery. 'The announcement follows a 2007 ruling by the U. S.  Supreme Court that  greenhouse gases can be classified as air pollutants under the Clean Air Act -  the 'biggest ruling ever on an environmental issue,' according to Jackson.  The  Bush administration then refused to issue an endangerment finding on  whether greenhouse gases constitute a public threat. Monday’s announcement means that even if Congress is unable to reach a  consensus, federal regulations aiming to mitigate climate change will be in  place.  It provides a foundation for - though does not explicitly require - such  regulatory actions as limiting emissions from U. S.  vehicles under the  proposed Clean Cars programme, emissions reporting systems, or requiring  large greenhouse-gas emitting facilities to use best-available technologies to  limit the emissions of new or expanded operations.  Jackson said there was as  yet no timetable for these actions and that the administration still views  congressional action as the best way for the U. S.  to combat climate change. The Competitive Enterprise Institute, a free-market advocacy group that  denies climate change is a problem, said later on Monday that they would  challenge the EPA’s finding in court. But the announcement of the endangerment finding is nonetheless expected  to both prod Congress to act on domestic climate legislation and up the  momentum toward a global agreement in Denmark. The timing of the announcement is particularly conspicuous, coming as it  does on the opening day of the much-anticipated conference.  Asked why the  announcement came now rather than when the regulations based on it are  announced, as is usually the case for similar EPA actions, Jackson said, 'This  is different,' explaining that the finding itself was the subject of a Supreme  Court case. But she added that she hoped it would 'show the American people that the  EPA is on the job,' and that it 'means that we arrive at the climate talks in  Copenhagen with a clear commitment. 'It also seemed intended to show that the administration stands firmly behind  the science of climate change, which has come under attack from climate- change deniers in recent weeks following the theft of several climate  scientists’ personal emails. 'There is nothing in the hacked e-mails that undermines the science upon  which this decision is based,' Jackson explained.  'Raising doubts - even in  the face of overwhelming evidence - is a tactic that has been used by  defenders of the status quo for years.  Those tactics have only served to delay  and distract from the real work ahead. '