Under a shady trellis of rice sacks in the province of Kampot in southern  Cambodia, 42-year-old Nuon Yan tends his crop of pepper vines. Small-scale farming is a tough occupation, with prices and weather  unpredictable and the cost of inputs high.  But Nuon Yan knows a good idea  when he sees one.  When he heard about an opportunity to double the money  he was making from black pepper, he jumped at it. That opportunity is to register the prized variety of pepper that he and  neighbouring farmers grow — known as Kampot Pepper — for Geographical  Indicator, or GI, status.  Kampot pepper is highly regarded by some chefs in  Europe and the United States as one of the world’s finest pepper varieties. If the term GI sounds unfamiliar, the concept itself is much better  understood, says Jean-Marie Brun, an advisor at GRET, a French non- governmental organisation involved in getting Kampot pepper its GI status. The most famous GI product is champagne.  In fact, says Brun, GI is what  makes champagne champagne rather than sparkling wine.  Unless bubbly is  grown in a specific part of France to specific rules and meets a certain quality  standard, it may not be marketed as champagne.  That, in a nutshell, is GI, and it will work exactly the same way with Kampot  pepper.  The added advantage is that Nuon Yan and the 130 other members of  the newly formed Kampot Pepper Producers’ Association (KPPA) — most of  whom are also farmers — decide on the rules and the quality standard. Brun says any grower who meets the requirements can join the association,  and once GI is registered it is protected under World Trade Organisation  rules. 'The right to use the name Kampot pepper once it is registered belongs to  anybody that complies with a certain number of requirements,' says Brun.   'The stakeholders decide on the delimitation of the area, how it should be  produced and the quality criteria. 'Brun explains that farmers like Nuon Yan, who currently earns 2. 50 U. S.   dollars per kilo for his crop, will likely double their income when GI status is  confirmed.  Complying with GI does bring added costs, but Brun says these typically  equate to five percent of the extra income.  In the case of Kampot pepper, and  because it is early days for the KPPA, the costs of compliance are higher than  that — currently around 10 percent — but they will decline as more members  join. Farmers like Nuon Yan benefit as a direct result of providing a product that  consumers can buy safe in the knowledge that it has attained a certain  quality standard and is what it claims to be.  But that assurance is worth  nothing unless someone ensures the members abide by their own standards. That policing role is performed by the KPPA itself and an independent auditor.   The KPPA is based in a small room in a shady grove five kilometres outside  the provincial town of Kampong Trach in Kampot province.  KPPA deputy  head, En Trou, explains that growers have had a tough time in the past. 'Because they were not able to market Kampot pepper and didn’t have much  money, the farmers faced many problems trying to earn enough to support  their families,' he says.  'We also found that other growers were using the  name Kampot pepper on their products. 'But the advent of GI status, which will be confirmed in a matter of weeks,  should start to resolve that.  En Trou is confident that the future will be  brighter for the association’s members, who currently harvest 14 tons of  pepper annually. 'I am hopeful that in another five years we will have increased the number of  producers to 150, and be selling between 20 and 30 tons a year,' he says.  The man in charge on the government side is Var Roth San, who heads the  intellectual property department at the Ministry of Commerce.  Among the  powers wielded by his department is the power to revoke the GI registration  for Kampot pepper should the independent auditor find the KPPA is shirking  its role to maintain standards. 'The association must form control within themselves to keep the quality  good,' he points out.  'Therefore the price of GI products increases.  If [there  is] no control within themselves or by an international organisation, who will  believe [that their product is high quality]?'Var Roth San says getting GI status for Kampot pepper links directly with the  strategy of government and donors to reduce widespread rural poverty.   Around 80 percent of the country’s people live in rural areas, and more than  half the eight million-strong labour force is involved in agriculture, so  boosting rural livelihoods is critical for Cambodia. 'We want to create jobs, and we want our poor to get more money from their  work in the rural area,' he says.  'GI law is one thing that will help the poor in  the rural areas. 'Although GI for Kampot pepper will benefit at most a couple of hundred  farmers, the government plans to roll out the initiative for other products  too, including palm sugar from Kampong Speu province and honey from the  northeastern province of Ratanakkiri.  But Kampot pepper will be the first. Back on his one-fifth hectare pepper plot in Kampot province, Nuon Yan  explains that his rice crop has to date generated more income than the  pepper he harvests from his 300 pepper vines.  Last year he made around 400  U. S dollars from selling 150 kilograms of pepper. But he is clearly banking on Kampot pepper’s potential.  'If I can sell my pepper for a higher price, then it is possible that one day I  could earn more from pepper than from rice,' he says. Nuon Yan has an eye on that future possibility.  He will deposit some of the  extra money he will earn in the bank and put the rest towards buying more  pepper vines.  He and the other members of the association are banking that  Kampot pepper’s GI status will result in a more secure future for them and  their families. 