A heated debate about the future of the Mekong River at a media conference in  this northern Thai city exposed a fault line triggered by the regional giant  China’s plans to build a cascade of dams on the upper stretches of South-east  Asia’s largest waterway. 'The most important issue for people who live along the banks (of the lower  stretches) of the Mekong are the dams and how these affect them,' said  Pipope Pantichpakdi, a Thai filmmaker who made the documentary ‘Mekong:  The Untamed’.  'They cannot see the river as a pretty sight. 'A recent documentary film about the Mekong made by Chinese filmmakers  overlooked some serious issues, he added during a session on contrasting  perspectives of the river at the Mekong Media Forum.  'There was nothing  about a lot of villages disappearing, that there are floods and the doubts  people have about the Chinese dams. 'His views were echoed by Manote Tripathi, the scriptwriter of the hour-long  Thai film.  'A number of countries are becoming aware of the consequences of  the mega-projects,' he told some 200 participants at the forum, which runs  from Dec.  9-12 in this northern city of Thailand. A Chinese journalist on the panel conceded that the planned development  targeting the Mekong would provoke a range of responses.  'It is natural that  different people will have different perspectives on similar issues,' said Zhu  Yan, a senior editor at the national broadcaster China Central Television.  'In  China there is a debate (around the question) of environment or dams. 'Tan Keng Ooi, a journalist based in Laos, confirmed that the feelings of the  countries in the Mekong River Basin towards China were shared.  He said Laos  was already feeling the impact of the Chinese dams due to sudden  fluctuations of the water level near the capital Vientiane, he raged. Similar sentiments from the people in Vietnam were captured in the film  ‘Mekong: The Untamed’ screened to participants at the forum organised by  the Asia-Pacific branch of the Inter Press Service news agency and the Probe  Media Foundation, a Manila-based media educator. The Thai film narrates the journey of Suthichai Yoon, a leading Thai media  personality, from the headwaters of the Mekong River in Tibet to the Mekong  Delta in Vietnam.  The question he seeks to answer through his travels is how  the planned Chinese dams affect communities who live along the banks of  the river. 'My Mekong journey goes to the heart of Asia’s complexities,' says the  narrator as he makes his way from China’s southern province of Yunnan to  the north-eastern Thai town of Chiang Kong.  The scenes he passes range  from the raging waters of the Mekong and hills swathed with mist to riverside  communities being torn apart by a building frenzy. 'I wonder if the Chinese realise what the people who are impacted by the  dam feel?' Suthichai asks at one point. A Thai activist interviewed on the banks of Mekong offers an answer.  'There  is no response from the Chinese government to the concerns we are  expressing,' says Pianporn Detees.  'We don’t want the Mekong River to end  up a silent river. 'The undercurrent of resentment towards the Chinese dams that surfaces in  Cambodia, Laos, Thailand and Vietnam hardly surprises Steve Van Beek, a  seasoned adventurer who has journeyed down the Mekong four times and  chronicled his discoveries in a series of books.  'There is a fear of Chinese  hegemony,' he told IPS. Chinese journalists themselves come in for a shock when they encounter  anti-dam sentiments in the Mekong River Basin, he revealed.  'They realise  that all the stories they had been told about China pursuing its development  plans in a spirit of brotherhood are not true. 'The silence of policymakers in China to address the worries of the lower  Mekong countries has a reason, he added.  'Deep down among the  policymakers there is an awareness of the tension.  Otherwise, they could have  opened up a dialogue with the affected communities. 'The 4,880-kilometre-long river flows from the Tibetan plateau, through  southern China, then passes Burma, before coursing into the Mekong Basin  shared by Thailand, Laos, Cambodia and Vietnam and empties out into the  South China Sea in southern Vietnam. China has already built three of a planned nine cascade of dams in the upper  Mekong to quench its thirst for more hydropower.  They include the Manwan  and Dachaoshan dams. The impact of these dams has begun to affect the diet and livelihood of  communities living along the lower Mekong.  Irregular fluctuation of water  levels during the dry season has damaged the river’s ecosystem and seen a  drop in fish catch, which is a major source of income — an estimated two to  three billion U. S.  dollars annually — for the 60 million people living in the  Mekong Basin. The concerns of the communities in the basin have also been aired by a  United Nations agency.  'Although the Mekong River Basin is not characterised either by water  shortages or open conflicts, its water issues have attracted considerable  attention due to the potential threats arising out of development pressures  and transboundary issues,' the United Nations Environmental Programme  stated in a report released in June. Among the potential sources of conflict is the 'major dam-building  programme in the upper reaches of the Mekong that China has embarked  on,' revealed the report, ‘Freshwater under Threat — South East Asia’.   'Significant impacts in terms of changes in (water) flow patterns and sediment  transport are likely. '  