Some of the world's most polluting companies are receiving financial support  from the European taxpayer to promote the continued use of the fuels that  cause global warming, according to a new report. In 2005, the European Commission, the executive arm of the EU, set up a  group known as the Zero Emissions Platform (ZEP) to advise it on the  possibility of capturing carbon dioxide from coal-fired power plants and  burying it underground.  Dominated by large energy firms, ZEP has secured  1. 5 billion euros (2. 2 billion dollars) in public subsidies and is busily lobbying  for support from policy makers at the international climate change talks now  under way in Copenhagen. Corporate Europe Observatory (CEO), an organisation which monitors the  influence of big business on the EU's institutions, deems it inappropriate that  such vast sums are being allocated to carbon capture and storage (CCS)  projects when the technology they employ has not yet proven to be  environmentally benign.  In a report titled 'Public funds used to lobby for fossil fuels in Copenhagen',  CEO notes that the proponents of carbon storage admit that it will not be  ready for use before 2020.  As a result, it will not help realise the EU's  objective of reducing by 20 percent its greenhouse gas emissions by the end  of the next decade.  Yet while the technology it is extolling is still in its infancy, ZEP is holding an  event in the Danish capital this weekend to urge that carbon storage should  be eligible for funding under the United Nations' clean development  mechanism.  This mechanism allows industrialised countries to invest in low- polluting projects in poorer nations as an alternative to cutting their own  emissions of greenhouse gases. ZEP's 23 members mainly represent major energy companies including Shell,  BP, Vattenfall, E. ON, Alstom, Siemens and Statoil.  Some of these companies  have a hugely controversial environmental record; Shell's gas-flaring activities  in the Niger Delta, for example, are the biggest single source of carbon  dioxide emissions in Africa.  By contrast, the World Wide Fund for Nature  (WWF) is the only well-known environmental group involved in ZEP. Yiorgos Vassalos, a CEO campaigner, said: 'The fossil fuel industry has used  public money to push the case for carbon capture and storage within the EU -  and now, they are in Copenhagen to argue for more of the same.  Giving CCS  credits under the clean development mechanism will provide another source  of subsidy - and legitimise the expansion of fossil fuel projects in the  developing world. ' He argued that the EU appeared more eager to devote public finances to  carbon storage than to renewable energy, even though wind and solar power  are among the cleanest forms of energy generation available.  Hans van der Loo, head of Shell's EU affairs office, denied that ZEP is trying to  win support for fossil fuels at the expense of renewables.  Carbon storage  should be part of a multi-pronged approach to tackling climate change, that  will also incorporate energy efficiency and increased use of renewable energy,  he said.  'CCS is not a silver bullet,' he added.  'It will not save the world.  But  without it the world will not be saved. 'Sanjeev Kumar, WWF representative on the platform, said the body provides a  'good snapshot' of what different interest groups think.  Yet he agreed that  the dominance of private sector representatives in ZEP and other such bodies  was an example of how 'there are far too many doors open to industry' in the  Brussels bureaucracy. Carbon storage projects have benefited considerably from a 'recovery plan'  approved by the EU in response to the financial crisis.  About 1 billion euros  has been made available to the technology as part of that blueprint, while  over 400 million euros has been provided from the Union's scientific research  funds.  Eight of the firms belonging to ZEP have received EU research funding.  These  are Shell, BP, Alstom, RWE, Siemens, Total, Air Liquide and Vattenfall.  Both  Vattenfall and Alstom run the Union's first demonstration project for carbon  storage at Schwarze Pumpe in Germany. The European Commission has calculated that 13 billion euros will be needed  for the development of carbon storage techniques over the coming decade.   Because this technology can draw money from the EU's emissions trading  scheme - which allows companies to buy and sell permits to pollute - and  from a major investment plan to transform Europe into a 'low-carbon'  economy, as well as from the national budgets of EU governments, the CEO  estimates that more than half of all support for carbon storage could come  from the public purse.  The CEO report says there is a risk that the EU's zealous promotion of so- called clean coal could ultimately prove ruinous for the climate, particularly if  other governments are convinced to share that enthusiasm during the  Copenhagen talks .  The result of ZEP's activities, said the report, could be  that 'precious resources for the funding of real solutions such as renewable  energy, energy efficiency and reforestation will be put on the back burner,  while the coffers of the fossil fuel companies historically responsible for  climate change will be full of public money. '  