Asian delegations to the ongoing global negotiations on climate change are  insisting that a political agreement must be reached to pave the way for a  legally binding treaty in the near future. 'Though we realise that it is highly unlikely to arrive at a consensus here in  Copenhagen for a legally binding treaty, we are quite hopeful of a political  accord,' Akira Yamada, Japan’s deputy director-general of the ministry of  foreign affairs, told IPS.  He said this would lay the foundation for a legally  binding treaty. Akira stressed that Japan wants a treaty that should be signed by both the  United States and China, 'the largest emitters of greenhouse gases,' he said.  Most negotiators from the Asia-Pacific region interviewed  by IPS said they  would only settle for a political accord, believing it will ensure the adoption  of a legally binding treaty.  But pressure groups are insisting that a legally  enforceable agreement should be the outcome of negotiations on climate  change as 'mere political promises would not do. ''A politically binding treaty amounts to a love affair while the legally binding  treaty is a proper wedlock.  This is the simplest expression one can use to tell  the difference between the two,' said Mike Shanahan, senior press officer at  the London-based independent policy research centre International Institute  of Environment and Development.   'No government at any time in any country can deviate from the legally  binding treaty while promises through political statements are no guarantee,'  he added. 'Although the speed of negotiations is very slow, we are making efforts to  make a political agreement, which would later become a legal agreement,'  said Kim Chan Woo, director general of South Korea’s ministry of  environment.  Both least developed and developing countries want the industrialised  nations to pay their 'climate debt' through funding commitments and  measures to reduce emissions drastically while allow the developed countries  to grow.  A Danish draft of a climate change agreement, leaked to the British  newspaper ‘The Guardian’ early this week, was summarily rejected by the  developing countries, because it tilts the balance of mitigation obligations  away from the developed nations, deemed a violation of the spirit and  substance of the United Nations Framework Convention and the Bali Action  Plan. 'The Danish text is an extremely dangerous text for developing countries.  It  robs them of an equitable and fair share of the atmospheric space,' said  Lumumba D-Aping, who chairs the largest of the negotiations blocks —  G77/China, comprising more than 130 countries. 'We know that Denmark’s prime minister is desperate for a deal in  Copenhagen, but it should be a balanced deal,' he said.  'We hope that  common sense and wisdom will prevail. '  Countries like China and India reacted to the draft in the same manner,  saying it was not acceptable to them.  The backlash ultimately prompted the  Danish government to say that it 'was a discussion paper, not a draft. '    'We feel that both the developed and developing countries should contribute  to combating climate change, but the nature of contribution should be  different,' South Korea’s Kim told IPS.   Indonesian delegate Angus Purnomo said his country has begun enforcing  certain climate mitigation measures like reducing emissions.  'But we need  financial and technological assistance from developed countries.  And this is  the forum where we should get us a guarantee of every kind of assistance in  black and white. ''We have come here to engage very constructively in the multilateral  negotiations under the United Nations system, and we are confident that  there will be good outcomes, which must be consistent with the convention  principles,' Vijay Sharma, a delegate from India, told IPS.   'We are having discussions on two separate tracks: one on long-term visions,  Long-term Cooperative Action, under which mitigation, adaptation, finance  and technology would be dealt with.  And on the other hand, we are  discussing how to enhance and get quantitative targets from Annex 1 [or  industrialised] countries under the Kyoto Protocol. '  Less than a week is left for the negotiators to arrive at conclusions before the  high-level segments of the ongoing climate talks.  Developing countries,  particularly the more vulnerable among them, are keen to see the foundations  of a legally binding treaty here in the Danish capital. 'We are not responsible at all for the global warming.  But when we look at  who is suffering the most, it is the least developed countries like Bangladesh  and other small island states that are going to suffer the most,' Manzoor-ul- Hanan Khan, the coordinator of the Bangladeshi delegation, said in an  interview with IPS.  'Therefore we want a written assurance from the  developed countries that they would make efforts to secure our future. ''Being a poor country, we also want financial and technological assistance for  mitigation and adaptation so that we achieve development without any  environmental costs,' he said.  'We have only one earth; there we need an  effective treaty to save it. '  Purushottam Ghimire, a negotiator from Nepal, said his country is facing a  major challenge, with melting glaciers threatening millions.  'We are here for a  consensus and concrete agreement,' he stressed.   * This story appears in the IPS TerraViva online daily published for the CoP 15  at Copenhagen. 