China appears to have gained instant celebrity status since the opening days of  the United Nations Climate Change Conference here. The many meetings and press briefings arranged by Chinese officials have  been jampacked by all who are excited to see the emerging economic giant of  Asia will lead the rest of the developing world during the climate negotiations  in the Danish capital.  In an interview with a small group of journalists that included IPS,  Ambassador Yu Qingtai, the Special Representative for Climate Change Talks  from China’s Ministry of Foreign Affairs, took a cautiously optimistic  approach in hopes of an agreement coming out of Copenhagen. 'Given the seriousness of the challenge we face and given the desire, we  believe that the Copenhagen conference is extremely important, that we will  achieve success,' said Yu.  'We’ve come also with a readiness to engage with  our partners to find ways to narrow the gap that still exists. ''By the end of next week, we’ll be able to show the world, despite all the  problems we encountered in the past two years after Bali, we have something  that we can agree on, something that is meaningful, something that is based  firmly on the convention and Bali Action Plan, something that will give us a  good foundation for the coming years for enhanced cooperation to fight  climate change,' he added. The Copenhagen climate talks, which began on Dec.  7, are set to culminate  tomorrow, Dec.  18. Yu pointed out out that 'political will' was one of the main obstacles to a  bilateral agreement.  He stated that all the Annex I (developed) countries have  expressed a lot of enthusiasm for making their contributions but have lagged  behind in keeping their promises. 'Whether or not the Annex I countries are part of the Kyoto Protocol, they  committed themselves to reducing their emissions to the 1990 levels by the  year 2000.  That is not something we want; that is something each and every  country agreed to in the convention, he said.  'If you look at the year 2000, I doubt that any country can stand before this  gathering and say, ‘I met my goals’ and so far I have not heard anybody say ‘I  have not failed’ and that is the kind of gap we are looking at,' Yu explained. In recent days, there has been a lot of strong rhetoric from both China and  the United States.  Being the two largest producers of greenhouse gases, a  significant deal from Copenhagen would not be possible without the two  countries reaching a compromise.  Responding to criticism that China would not need any money from the  United States, aired by top climate change negotiator Todd Sterns, Yu pointed  out that when China takes a strong stand on financing and technology  transfer issues, the government is not looking at what the country can get  from what may or may not eventually emerge from these talks. 'We have strong positions on financing and technology transfer because these  are the obligations the developed countries undertook in the Convention (on  Climate Change), but have so far failed to meet them.  There’s no way the U. S.   will join the Kyoto Protocol, but the U. S.  (government) is a contracting party  to the convention.  If you look at the convention as Annex I countries, as  developed countries, there are clear provisions on what they need to  implement,' said Yu. Saying that the larger developing countries are able to help the smaller  developing countries, he pointed out continuing South-South cooperation  underway and gave the example of China working with African states.  In a ministerial conference carried out weeks before the Copenhagen climate  talks, called the Sino-African Forum that took place in Sharm el-Sheikh,  Egypt, Chinese Premier Wen Jiabao and other African heads of state agreed on  an action plan under which Beijing agreed to enhance the support it gives to  Africa and expand the area of climate change in bilateral programmes. 'We are helping Africa fight climate change in terms of adaptation, capacity  building, sustainable agriculture, and we have already announced we will  increase our resources to help Africa do all this,' said Yu.  Yu does not agree that there are 'major' or 'minor' players in the ongoing  climate change talks.  'What we are working for is a close regional cooperation  across a huge range of issues from economic development, social  development, capacity building, human resource development, all the way to  climate change,' he said. 'It’s a common challenge to the world but definitely a common challenge to  each and every country in Asia.  You have China and India, larger developing  countries who are maintaining a good momentum in economic and social  development.  You have the Small Island Developing States, the Least  Developed Countries at different stages of economic development,' Yu  pointed out.  'There is great potential in working together; complementing each other so  the end result will be good for each and every country involved in this effort,  because what’s good for the region is good for the world. 'Yu concluded: 'If the developed countries continue to fail in meeting their  commitments in terms of financing and technology transfer, it becomes all  more important that the developing countries step up their efforts to help  each other. ' 