Seventy-one-year old Kham, a woman from Napho Klang, left home early in the  morning of Dec.  14 to join a ritual to revitalise the Mekong River, which passes  through this part of north-eastern Thailand. She had heard that there would be a dam constructed at Koum village  between the Thai-Lao border of Khong Chiem, Ubon Ratchathani and  Xanasomboun, Champasak province in Lao PDR.  Worried that the dam would  bring floods and destroy their fishing livelihoods, she felt that taking part in  the ceremony would help. 'I’m not so sure when it will be built, but I’m afraid there will be a flood in  my area.  I joined this ceremony because I pay respect to the river and ask the  river protect our lives by giving us food,' said Kham.  Some 400 villagers, including Kham, took part in the ceremony, which is  meant to sustain the life of the Mekong river by invoking the help of the  spirits like the Naga or the Mekong dragon.  The ceremony was held in  Samphanbok (which means ‘three thousand holes’), also known as the Grand  Canyon of Thailand.  The community is worried about the Koum village dam, which would be a  1,872-megawatt hydropower dam on the Mekong mainstream.  In March  2008, Laos and Thailand signed an agreement to develop this dam with the  aim of benefiting communities on the Lao and Thai sides of the Mekong river. This dam is just one of several that have been making news in the Mekong  region, given a long list of hydropower projects that several countries,  ranging from China, Laos and Thailand, plan for the mainstream section of  the 4,880-kilometre river. For Thailand, in particular, reports of more dams bring to mind the well- known and painful experience of communities around the Pak Moon dam,  which stands on a Mekong tributary here in Ubon Ratchathani province.   Communities protested the dam project after their livelihoods were wrecked  by it, prompting them to pressure the Thai government to open the sluice  gates in order to get part of their fish resources back. Locals who fear the impact of the Ban Koum dam recall how fish could not  navigate the Pak Moon dam, and say the same thing might happen here. More than 200 families in four villages on the Thai and Lao sides of the river  would be directly affected by the dam construction and its impact on the  environment, although they may not have to leave their homes. Sungthong from Songkorn village has been earning a living by catching fish  in the Mekong since his father’s generation and fears that the life they know  will go if the dam project destroys the fish environment.  He and other villagers in the ceremony insist that no villager would want the  dam built, even if the government compensates them. 'Compensation? How much do we get? Even if the government gives us a  million (baht), which we would actually not get, I don’t think it will cover our  losses from the dam,' Sungthong pointed out.  'As a fisherman myself, I need  to catch fish.  I need my life to be like this, rather than taking some money,  and having my life changed. 'Some also fear that with a dam in the vicinity, they might no longer see the  Naga fireballs phenomenon, which communities on both the Thai and Lao  sides of the river enjoy each year during Buddhist Lent.  Hordes of visitors  come to witness this event each year, marked by fireballs that appear to come  out of the river water. Local non-government organisations have also issued statements asking the  governments to halt the dam project.  A group of senators, including Prasarn  Marukpitak and Kamnoon Sidhisamarn and a few more, also attended the  river ceremony and local discussions here, promising to pressure the  government to give up the project, Already, villagers say, they can see people doing surveys along the target  project site. Apart from Ban Koum, under a similar agreement the Thai and Lao  governments have planned another dam on the Mekong river at Pak Chom  district, Loei and Sungthong districts, Vientiane prefecture in Laos, with a  capacity to produce 1,079 megawatts of electricity. According to research by the non-government organisation TERRA, or  Foundation for Ecology Recovery in Bangkok, there are 11 planned dams on  the lower basin of the Mekong mainstream.  Apart from the one planned for  Koum village, there are projects slated for Pak Beng, Luang Prabang,  Xayabouri, Pak Lay, Xanakham, Pak Chom, Lat Sua, Don Sahong in Laos, and  Stung Treng and Sambor in Cambodia, it said.  