Even if Prime Minister Najib Razak is in Copenhagen for the  high-level segment of the U. N.  conference on climate change,  there has been precious little meaningful debate on the  subject here in Malaysia. Few Malaysians really understand the issues at stake, in  part due to the lack of much meaningful analysis in the  media apart from the odd commentary.  Not many politicians, whether from the ruling coalition or  opposition ranks, have also really discussed climate change  and its impact on this South-east Asian country, and put it  in the public domain. Government-controlled television and newspapers have in the  main relied on video clips and press reports from the  foreign media and western news agencies.  These are usually  tucked away in world news sections, unless something  dramatic happens like the mass arrests of demonstrators in  Copenhagen.    The Malaysian public has largely remained in the dark or  unconcerned over the issues involved.  Only 35 percent --  down from 52 percent in 2008 -- of Malaysians agreed that  ''climate change and how we respond to it are among the  biggest issues they worry about today', according to a  Climate Confidence Monitor 2009 survey conducted by Hong  Kong Shanghai Banking Corp.  Two thirds, however, think a new  global deal is important.   But the major factor behind the lack of focus of climate  change issues in the country is its geographical position,  since Malaysia lies in an area thus far spared from extreme  weather events, suggests Anthony Tan, executive director of  the Centre for Environment, Technology and Development  (Cetdem). ''The weather is a bit more unpredictable now, but we  haven't been shocked into the reality of climate change.   There is no extreme drought though there are floods, but  those seem to be on a yearly basis.  This is unlike the  situation in the Pacific islands, where they are worried  about rising sea levels. 'Cetdem is an independent non-profit group committed to  improving environmental quality by promoting the appropriate  use of technology and sustainable development.  It is part of  a Malaysian climate change steering committee comprising  government departments and agencies.  The committee, set up  by the Ministry of Natural Resources and Environment, meets  twice a year. From Copenhagen, the state news agency Bernama quoted Najib  as saying that Malaysia believes that having developed  countries do more to keep their commitments to cut  greenhouse gas emissions is an issue of fairness.  'This is  based on the principle of fairness because they (developed  countries) are the biggest contributors of carbon  emissions,' he told Malaysian journalists there Friday after  addressing the climate change conference. As a developing nation, Malaysia has no quantitative  commitments under the Kyoto Protocol.  Through the clean  development mechanism under the Protocol, Malaysia can trade  certified emission reductions in the international market. Developing countries have insisted that the Kyoto Protocol  should continue and that developed countries should slash  their greenhouse gas emissions by at least 40 percent,  compared to 1990 levels, by 2020. But the developed nations do not want this without the  United States on board.  They also want developing nations to  commit to cuts. Developed nations have rejected this, wanting a second  period of the Kyoto Protocol beyond 2012 and a so-called  two-track approach.  This would that see to it that the  developed nations commit themselves to more cuts, the United  States comes on board through a second track of similar  commitments and developing nations agree to voluntary action  supported by financial and technological aid. Najib said Malaysia would have to do its part in addressing  climate change.  But he also said that the 10 billion U. S.   dollar fast-track funding for developing nations to control  their emissions, as discussed in the Copenhagen talks, is  small compared to the accountability of developed nations. Whether Malaysia indeed keeps to its own commitments remains  to be seen.  Oil and gas, manufacturing, and oil palm products are major  revenue earners at a time when Malaysia is expected to post  its largest budget deficit in two decades at 7. 4 percent of  Gross Domestic Product.  In eastern Sarawak state alone,  Malaysia's auditor-general noted in his 2008 report that  close to a million hectares of permanent forest reserve had  been lost between 1990 and 2008. Malaysia recorded 187 million tonnes of carbon emissions in  2006, according to U.  N.  Millennium Development Goal  indicators.  That puts it in third place in the South-east  Asian region behind Indonesia (333 million tonnes) and  Thailand (273 million tonnes), with Vietnam (106 million  tonnes) in fourth place. On a per capita basis, a different picture emerges.  With 7. 2  tonne of CO2 per capita, Malaysia is still the third highest  emitter in South-east Asia.  Brunei tops the list at 15. 5  tonnes per capita, followed by Singapore with 12. 8 tonnes.   Thailand (4. 3 tonnes) and Indonesia (1. 5 tonnes) occupy  fourth and fifth places respectively. Malaysia's rhetoric on climate change has to be seen against  what actually takes place locally, given the balancing act  the government needs to do between its eagerness to boost  economic growth and also cater to investors' interests as it  drives the economy forward. On Monday this week, as the Copenhagen summit moved into  high gear before its scheduled end on Friday, Malaysian  Youth and Sports Minister Wee Jeck Seng, representing the  Prime Minister, unveiled the drivers for Malaysia's new Team  Lotus F1 that will debut in the coming season of high- octane, fuel-guzzling Formula One racing.   