Lake Chad was bigger than Israel less than 50 years ago.  Today its surface area  is les than a tenth of its earlier size, amid forecasts the lake could disappear  altogether within 20 years. Climate change and overuse have put one of Africa's mightiest lakes in mortal  danger, and the livelihoods of the 30 million people who depend on its waters  is hanging by a thread as a result. An unprecedented crisis is looming that would create fresh hunger in a  region already suffering grave food insecurity, and pose a massive threat to  peace and stability, experts say. 'If Lake Chad dries up, 30 million people will have no means of a livelihood,  and that is a big security problem because of growing competition for smaller  quantities of water,' Dr Abdullahi Umar Ganduje, executive secretary of the  Lake Chad Basin Commission (LCBC) tells IPS in Rome. 'Poverty and hunger will increase.  When there is no food to eat, there is  bound to be violence. 'The lake, which shrank 90 percent between 1963 and 2001 from 25,000  square kilometres to under 1,500, is bordered by Chad, Niger, Cameroon and  Nigeria.  Four more countries, the Central African Republic, Algeria, Sudan and Libya,  share the lake's hydrological basin and are therefore affected by its fortunes.  'Lake Chad has experienced shrinkage,' Libyan leader Muammar Gaddafi said  at November's World Food Security Summit at the United Nations Food and  Agriculture Organisation (FAO) in Rome.  'If it dries up, it will be a real  disaster.  I want to warn the world about this imminent disaster. 'That disaster has already started.  Villages that used to be thriving lakeside  ports are now stranded miles from the water, and have been swallowed by  the advancing Sahara desert.  Fishers and farmers are struggling to survive.  'The dramatic situation is already taking place,' Maher Salman, a technical  officer with FAO's land and water division tells IPS.  'It's clear that the  consequences have started.  There is outward migration.  People are looking  for water, so they leave the basin area. 'Fishers have seen once massive catches frequently reduced to half-filled  buckets.  The FAO says the lake's fish production has fallen 60 percent, and  the variety of fish caught has dramatically declined too. Farmers who rely on lake waters for irrigation are having to move nearer to  the water or abandon their activities.  Lack of water has caused pasture lands  to shrivel up and led to a serious shortage of animal feed, estimated at 46. 5  percent in some areas in 2006, resulting in cattle deaths and plummeting  livestock production.  This is the sort of situation former World Bank vice-president Ismail  Serageldin was worried about in 1995 when he said that 'the wars of the 20th  century were fought over oil, and the wars of the next century will be about  water' — a view echoed in reports by several organisations including the U. S.   Central Intelligence Agency. While some experts remain sceptical about the prospect of all-out wars being  fought over water, there have been numerous reports of clashes between  farmers and herds-people competing for productive land in the Lake Chad  area. Biodiversity too has been hit by the lake's retreat.  So has the region's health  situation. 'Due to the movement of people looking for food there is a high level of  interaction, which complicates matters because of the high prevalence of HIV  among Lake Chad inhabitants,' says Ganduje.  'The African Development Bank  has come to our aid, and we are tackling this. 'Little can be done at the regional level about climate change, which is  attacking the lake on two fronts - reducing the rainfall that feeds it, and  accelerating evaporation of its waters due to higher temperatures.  Its  shallowness for such a major water body makes it particularly vulnerable to  these attacks. It is a grim situation, but not a hopeless one.  The other half of the problem,  over-extraction, can be tackled locally. 'We are optimistic,' says Ganduje.  'We are regulating the use of Lake Chad  water.  We are drawing up a charter so everyone has common rules and  regulations in the use of water.  'We are also controlling activities on the tributaries to Lake Chad, such as the  construction of dams and irrigation activities.  We are controlling human  behaviour in response to other factors that are outside of our control. ' This confidence is justified in part by growing understanding of the need for  a response. 'There is recognition of the need for new management strategies to be put  into place,' says Salman.  'The most common conclusion of studies on the  lake's shrinkage is that it is due to both human pressure on water resources  and on climate change.  A solution should be possible.  'There needs to be optimum use of the waters in each sector, up-scaling  water conservation and small-scale agricultural technologies for more  efficient irrigation.  Awareness about use of the waters is important as well, so  people cut down. 'The LCBC also has high hopes of an ambitious plan to replenish the lake to its  1960s levels by diverting water from the Oubangui River, which is the major  tributary to the Congo River. 'The feasibility study has started and a fund has been set up,' says Ganduje.   'The heads of state are confident of progress.  If the feasibility study is  positive, we believe we have the political support required. 'The FAO says it does not have a position on whether the transfer project  should go ahead, although it has called for very careful consideration of its  impact, including that on the Congo River system.  What it views as key is the  presentation of concrete plans to save the lake, so donors can be badgered  into committing to a cause that is crucial to millions of people . 'There is a strategic action plan for the sustainable development of Lake  Chad, but to translate that into action we need an investment plan,' says  Salman.  'We need more meetings of donors to get them to commit and make  good those commitments through investment.  The good news is that there is  a consensus on the need for action. '  