Tragic as it was, the Asian tsunami wrought a sea change in the lives of  survivors in the sleepy coastal hamlets of southern Tamil Nadu state, where  some 8,000 people are known to have died. On December 26, 2004, a 9. 3-magnitude earthquake generated a tsunami  that struck countries around the Indian Ocean, killing at least 200,000  people.  Indonesia, Thailand, Sri Lanka and India were the hardest hit. 'Before the tsunami many of these villages suffered from gross neglect by  local administrations, and their inhabitants were largely left to fend for  themselves,' said Bhakther Solomon, chief of the Development Promotion  Group (DPG), a major non-governmental organisations involved in relief and  rehabilitation work in Tamil Nadu.    DPG constructed 822 of the 22,000 houses that were built by various NGOs  as the 'visible part of rehabilitation work,' added Solomon, speaking with IPS  over telephone from Chennai, capital of Tamil Nadu. The wave of NGO and government support that came to the inhabitants of  coastal villages in badly affected districts such as Nagapattinam, Cuddalore  and Kanyakumari intended to touch every aspect of the lives of thousands of  people has continued for the last five years.   'Today a point has been reached where our main fear is that these people are  becoming aid-dependent and that many people are moving away from their  traditional occupation of artisanal fishing and are perhaps losing skills built  over centuries,' said Solomon.  For instance, fisherman Pavalaparai and his wife Sarvanade, from the village  of Kameshwaram, do not want their school-going son to become a fisherman  and plan to support him through higher education.  They have been able to  return to their traditional occupation—which involves drying and selling their  catch—with support from DPG.   Pavalparai and his wife also plan on having two more children and educating  them as well—something unthinkable before the tsunami.   What made the difference for them was a motorised fishing boat and nets  provided by DPG, which help Pavalparaj earn around 10,000 rupees (214 U. S.   dollars) per month during the main season, as well as enrolment in a self- help group (SHG) that DPG encouraged the villagers to form.    DPG alone distributed 133 fibre-glass boats fitted with outboard motors that  replaced the flimsy wooden craft, most of which vanished when the giant  waves generated by tsunami crashed onto Tamil Nadu shores.  Pavalaparai saves his surplus income in the SHG, saying it is enough to meet  their son’s educational expense and help them raise loans when the need  arises.   He recalls a time when fishing was the sole source of income for  fishermen like him and how they were indebted, powerless people and lived  constantly under the threat of big boat owners, moneylenders and merchants.   'Earlier we could not raise loans without collateral security and we did not  even know how to voice our difficulties,' Pavalaparai said.   Before the SHGs were formed, the villagers depended on the village  ‘panchayat’ (smallest administrative unit) for all official and legal  communication.  Today, empowered by the SHG, they deal directly with higher  officials to address their concerns.  For example, when land for housing was being allotted, Pavalaparai and his  four brothers received just two plots.  But representations through the SHG  enabled them to get a fair share of land with houses on them.  In all, DPG formed 168 SHGs with microfinance support worth 21 million  dollars.  Solomon said that while the different NGOs followed different strategies, DPG  used a 'joint consultative process' involving the panchayats in identifying  who would benefit from housing while ensuring that ownership was vested  with both husband and wife.  'One change that we saw was the attitude (of the people) towards  construction labour.  The proud fishermen and their wives would have nothing  to do with it but as construction activity increased and the price of labour  picked up, many of the women became skilled masons,' Solomon said.  With their inhibitions gone, the women began to pick up other skills that DPG  provided through special courses such as tailoring.  When Muthulakshmi in the fishing village Vanavanmahadevi found that she  could not support her four children from the limited income of her fisherman  husband, she enrolled for a one-year training programme run by DPG in  tailoring.   With a sewing machine partly financed by DPG, she became the village’s first  woman tailor.   As the NGOs built homes and community centres, the state government  followed up with street lighting and other infrastructure, generating a modest  economic boom in the coastal areas.  Some NGOs such as Embracing the World (ETW) run by the Mata  Amritanandamayi Math (MAM) trust built not only homes but also roads,  wells, schools, community halls and health care centres.  'There has definitely been a change in the lives of the people of these areas  as result of the charitable activity that was mounted there in the post- tsunami period,' Abhayamitra Chaitanya from the MAM trust told IPS. ETW also built and donated 700 fibre-glass fishing boats complete with  engines on the condition that fishing formed the main livelihood in the  affected villages. 'Overall there has been a rise in expectations among the people, and this is  reflected in the fact that there are now very few school dropouts in villages  such Vilunthanmavadi, Mapillaioorani, Vellapallem and Vanavanmahadevi,'  said Solomon.   What made the transformation possible was the large scale funds that poured  into the area from various donors.   'Money for the houses and fishing boats came from Diatonic Emergency Aid  and Evangelischer Entwicklungsdienst, both of which are based in Germany,'  Solomon said, adding that in all, his NGO received over seven million dollars  for its tsunami relief and rehabilitation programme.  'Our challenge now is to see that the momentum generated in community  sustenance is not lost and the villages do not slide back into neglect,'  Solomon said.  