Waves hitting a train and carriages half submerged in water.  Scores of men,  women and children leaping above the water, hands outstretched, bodies strewn  all over. These images were captured on a mural that became a crucial part of the  memorial at Peraliya, a village 90 kilometres south of Colombo, right next to  the coast.  Yet, images of post-tsunami impacts that are not depicted on the  mural run the gamut of emotions. On Dec.  26, 2004, at 9:25 a. m. , a south-bound train was hit by gigantic  waves here, killing over 1,500.  Little Lahiru Mihiram has no clear memory of this father, just a thought that  he must be one of those many scared faces on the mural.  He was less than  four months old when his father ran to the train after hearing the screams of  panic-stricken passengers as the first waves came flooding inland.  He was  never found thereafter.   On Dec.  26 this year Lahiru was one of the dozens of mourners, relatives and  just plain curious visitors who turned up at the memorial for the five-year  anniversary of the tragedy.  While Lahiru’s memory was vague, that was not case for Dayawathie Perera,  who survived the train tragedy but lost her daughter-in-law of one month  and the girl’s mother.  'It was terrible, terrible,' she recalled of the horror.    She was travelling with her son, his new wife and her mother when the first  wave came.  'He (her son) kept calling everyone and telling them of the waves,  and then the big one came. 'Perera was saved by a monk from a nearby temple, who found her stuck  under four other bodies.  'He had seen my fingers move,' she recounts to IPS.   Her son, who finally discovered his young wife’s body, put it in the mass  grave with his own hands.  'He refuses to come here; he says it is too hard. ' There was no massive crowd at the memorial.  The country did observe two  minutes of silence at precisely the same time the tragedy ravaged this coastal  village.  Along the coast, there were small ceremonies.  Mourners in small groups  gathered at the grave sites or where they last saw their loved ones and held  prayers.  White flags dotted small graves as candles flickered against the wind.   Those travelling along the southern coast stopped at the giant Buddha statue  — a replica of the one destroyed in Bamiyan, Afghanistan — and paid homage  to it before continuing their journey.  In the east, in Kalmunai, which suffered the worst damage, small  commemoration events were held on the beach.  As a whole, the  commemoration of the worst natural tragedy to hit the island since known  records were kept was a private affair.  'People have forgotten about what happened, people have moved on,' says  Ajantha Samarwickrema, who shot footage of the waves crashing into Galle  town, just south of Peraliya.  The Asian tsunami that affected the countries surrounding the Indian Ocean  left a terrible imprint on the country, already battered by a long-running civil  war then.  Over 35,000 were killed, at least 100,000 houses left in need of  repair or reconstruction, a million displaced and a reconstruction bill of 3. 2  billion U. S.  dollars.  Vimasa Madumali was five when the tsunami hit her village Thudawa, in  Matara about 150 km south of Colombo.  Her family has got a new house and  her father has returned to fishing, with help from donors and governments  that provided fishing gear to replace those washed away by the waves.  'We are happy here, we got help and we can live in peace,' she tells IPS.  The  family has moved inland from the coast.   It is the same with Rasheena Umma a young woman, now living at the French  Friendship village in Kalmunai, on the eastern coast, 300 km from Colombo.   Her former house was located right next to the coast and not a single wall  was left standing.  'It is a miracle we are alive,' she says. The new house built, with funds from France, is about 2 km from the coast,  and Umma is relieved.  'We got something; it may be not a lot, but we can go  on living.  That is better than getting killed. 'There is some discontent on the beach, particularly among over 1,300  families in Kalmunai that are still waiting for houses.  Others grumble over the  quality of the assistance they got.  Transparency International stated over the weekend that at least 470 million  dollars out of a total of one billion dollars disbursed for reconstruction  efforts by March 2007 had gone unaccounted for.  'There is no precise evidence to explain the missing sum of 471 million  dollars.  Some government officials rejected the fact of such a missing  amount, though they have failed to give any explanation about the figures  produced,' added the Berlin-based anti-corruption body.  One such alleged mismanagement involved Hungama, a tsunami housing  project in the Hambantota District, 300 km south of Colombo, built with  public donations from Hungary.  Here the houses were so badly constructed  that they started to lose rafters, beams and windows even before the first  occupants walked in in late 2005.  Now the houses have been assigned to civil  servants, whose official quarters were lost in the tsunami.  Others have settled  in after carrying out extensive repairs on their own.  'The houses were not liveable; we had to do a lot of repairs,' says Charles  Rathnayake.  But even he is happy now.  My wife was saved at the last moment.   If I had not grabbed her, she would not be here.  It is much more than getting  a house,' Rathnayake says.  The destruction left by the waves was so massive and omnipresent that many  people find it hard to forget.  Along the beach there are still hulls of boats,  buildings washed apart by the gushing waters, which stand like silent  reminders.  For those like Perera, forgetting the dead will never be easy.  Hers is a  gnawing pain that has endured for five years and will endure even longer.  'She (her daughter-in-law) was on the phone with my daughter when the  waves came.  My daughter heard her scream.  That was the last anyone heard  from her,' she says.  'How can you forget that?' Still others try to forget to tragedy that befell them five years ago.  'We have  to move on.  We can’t linger in the past,' says Rathnanayke.  'I think it is high  time that we spoke of the living rather than the dead. ' 