Days after the New Year’s Eve revelry dies down, expect colorful lanterns or  wreaths to remain hanging on the windows of many Filipino homes — part of a  tradition in this South-east Asian country known to have the longest Yuletide  celebration in the world. In Barangay (translated as ‘village’) Lower Bicutan, in Taguig City, located 15  kilometres east of Manila, the ubiquitous holiday decorations are a testament  to a never-say-die spirit and ingenuity.  They are mostly fashioned out of  water lilies that clog the town’s drainage system instead of the conventional  bamboo sticks, Japanese and crepe paper that have come to be associated  with the iconic symbol of the Filipino Christmas. Taguig City outlines Laguna de Bay, one of the biggest freshwater lakes in  Asia and the Philippines’ largest inland body of water.  Water lilies are known  to thrive in such bodies of water, growing to a height of 40 inches and  multiplying fast.  Thus they can easily displace local aquatic plants and  adversely affect water quality and flow. When Typhoon Ketsana unleashed its wrath in late September, the village of  approximately 44,000 residents found itself submerged in water as did other  parts of the city.  'We are so used to flooding, but ‘Ondoy’ (local name of the  typhoon) was different,' says resident Lolita Remillo, adding that many of her  'kababayan’ (fellowmen) died. 'Water lilies were deemed among the culprits behind Taguig’s submergence in  floodwater. But city councilor Gigi de Mesa sees a bright side to this otherwise tragic  event.  'The flooding even pushed the water lily nearer to the shore.  This even  made it easier for us to collect water lilies. 'Just a month before Ketsana hit the country, the city government launched  the Water Lily Livelihood Project, which aimed to provide a source of income  for the communities in the city, particularly women, while clearing Laguna de  Bay of water lilies. 'The primary purpose of the project is to generate livelihood among the  people of Taguig City, especially women,' says Kaye Tinga, wife of city mayor  Fred Tinga. The project involves collecting the nuisance aquatic plants and turning them  into useful products.  'We are not only creating jobs but helping the  environment as well,' reasons de Mesa, one of the organisers of the project  that has turned into a cooperative. Through the training spearheaded by Kaye Tinga, community members  learned how to weave products like bags, place mats, slippers and Christmas  decors like lantern and wreaths out of water lilies. Some 200 people  were initially trained, followed by another batch of 800,  who were then taught about various aspects of the livelihood project. The recycling process is straightforward.  Upon harvest, the plants are dried  under the sun and then cured and dyed before they are woven into craft  articles.  A certain level of inventory of processed water lilies is maintained to  ensure a steady supply of raw materials and enable the project proponents to  determine the volume of orders that can be realistically accepted. Daily gross sales average 10,000 pesos (217 U. S.  dollars).  At the onset of this  year's Christmas season, orders began to increase.  This enabled the workers  to earn an average of 2,000 to 3,000 pesos (44 to 65 dollars) each a week. Taguig City is not alone in its efforts to make something useful out of  otherwise environmental hazards.  Not too far from Taguig is Pasig City—some  12 km east of Manila—which was similarly inundated by floodwaters at the  height of Typhoon Ketsana.  A community-based multi-purpose cooperative in Barangay Ugong, one of  numerous villages comprising the city, collects and recycles used juice plastic  pouches as part of its campaign to recycle non-biodegradable products into  colorful handbags, slippers, cellular phone cases, umbrellas and other items. 'It started when we visited a dumpsite.  We saw that they were burning rolls of  doy packs from the factories,' recounts Editha Santiago, founder of KILUS  Foundation, which stands for Women United for the Nation’s Progress.  'We  remembered our own collection of used doy packs.  We thought we could  come up with something.  That kind of garbage should not be burned. 'The foundation, which was organised in 1999 as an all-women group,  approached several doy pack manufacturers asking them to buy its collection  of used doy packs, but only one of them agreed.  Big multinational companies  turned it down. 'That’s when we intensified our drive to collect doy packs, the packaging of  which is colorful and sturdy, so we thought hard about what to make out of  them,' explains Santiago.  Members of the foundation regularly visited nearby  barangays or villages in the city, including funeral homes, churches and  schools, to buy used juice packs for 20 centavos each (or less than 1 U. S.   cent).  In 2000, KILUS launched its own line of doy bags. When the project started, it sold only a few items, mostly to the members’  families and friends.  But word soon spread in nearby towns and cities about  the ingenious recycled products.  Soon KILUS was deluged with orders,  prompting it to expand its production to seven other villages within the city. The cooperative’s membership base has expanded to include entire families,  including children.  Around five percent of current members are males, says  Santiago.  KILUS has been featured both in local and international media like BBC and  CNN.  Its products have graced international publications such as the U. S. ’s  ‘Teen Vogue’, Britain’s ‘The Observer’ and those in Japan. The global campaign against climate change has generated greater interest in  its products, particularly abroad.  Bulk orders are from Europe and Japan, with  more regular orders coming in from the United States.   The largest U. S book  retailer Barnes & Noble is its latest addition to its international clientele.  'Since last year we have made six shipments of 20-foot container (vans) to  them (Barnes & Noble).  I think they sell our tote bags at 16. 95 U. S.  dollars  each,' says Santiago. In the aftermath of typhoons Ketsana and Parma, says Santigao, they got even  more orders from their foreign clients.  What started out as a small community undertaking is now a profitable  cottage industry that has been a steady source of income for some 50,000  residents of Pasig.  Tears welling up in her eyes, Santiago says one worker was able to construct  a toilet in her house using her earnings.  KILUS members can generate as  much as 8,000 pesos (174 dollars) monthly during peak seasons.   Clara Buctuan, another member, says she joined the cooperative to augment  her husband’s income as a tricycle driver.  Her monthly earnings of 6,000  pesos (130 dollars) allow her to send their two children to school and help  with other household expenses.  Joining the foundation helped her in other ways.  'I gained self-confidence,'  she says.  The self-proclaimed environmentalist adds that she also takes pride  in being able to help the environment.  Since it started, KILUS has recycled 90 tonnes of doy packs into commercial  items, including bags. The water lily lanterns still hanging on residential windows in Taguig and the  doy fashion bags produced in Pasig are a constant reminder to their residents  that there is money in trash.  Sound environmental practices, they say,  make  good business sense. *This story is part of a series of features on sustainable development by IPS —  Inter Press Service and IFEJ — International Federation of Environmental  Journalists, for the Alliance of Communicators for Sustainable Development  (www. complusalliance. org). 