The world's hungry have good reason to look to the new year with trepidation  given the experience of the 12 months that preceded it. The number of people without enough to eat crossed the one-billion mark  for the first time in 2009, and November's United Nations World Summit on  Food Security failed to live up to hopes that it would be a historic turning  point to end this scourge. The meeting at the Food and Agriculture Organisation's (FAO) Rome  headquarters was snubbed by the most powerful nations' leaders, did not  establish binding funding commitments for the fight on hunger, or set a date  for its eradication. Experts say food prices are still high in developing countries after the spike of  2007-08 which, together with the financial meltdown, lifted the world's  hungry tally to 1. 02 billion.  Prices will remain volatile, they say. What's more, one of the consequences of the failure of the Copenhagen  climate change talks in December is that no progress has been made on what  is an increasing threat to food security in many parts of the world. 'If you look at all the effects of global warming, food security is really where  it all hits home at a most fundamental level,' Janet Larsen, director of  research at the Earth Policy Institute, told IPS.  'At a basic level, crop yields are  affected by rising temperatures and once temperatures get too hot, crops can  fail. 'It affects water resources.  In some places you'll have too much water, in  others too little.  Our water resources are already stressed and the loss of  glacial melt will affect many rivers in the dry season. 'Then you also have sea level rises.  Just a one-metre rise in sea levels would  flood a large chunk of Bangladesh's rice land, for example.  You're looking at  tens of million of climate refugees, having to move out of their areas, losing  their food supplies. 'So given the old year's grim legacy, is there any hope of making inroads into  the number of hungry people in 2010?The FAO believes there is. First, while its experts say the world is not out of the woods regarding the  food crisis, and though the food-price index hit a 14-month high in  November, they do not expect a repeat of the 2007-08 crisis in the near  future. 'A healthy stock situation and good production prospects reduce the risk of a  major price surge over the next six months,' said the FAO's Hafez Ghanem. Furthermore, the agency argues that, with the right policies, it is possible for  developing countries to make progress in food security even in times of  economic hardship.  In its recent Pathways to Success report, the FAO highlighted the cases of  some of the 31 states, including Brazil, Nigeria, Vietnam and Armenia, who  have bucked the negative trend to reduce the number people in their lands  with empty stomachs. There are no one-size-fits-all solutions, but these experiences suggest that  while defeating hunger might be tough, it does not have to be complicated if  tackled with determination. A common denominator in the success stories is the use of twin-track  strategies - investing in agriculture, especially smallholder farmers, to boost  food availability in the medium term, while providing safety nets so the needy  can survive in the short term. 'Our task is straightforward,' says Josette Sheeran, executive director of the  World Food Programme, part of a threesome of Rome-based U. N.  food  agencies along with the FAO and the International Fund for Agricultural  Development (IFAD). 'We must meet emergency food needs when disasters like droughts and  floods strike.  We must ensure access to nutritious food and safety nets for  those who are hungry today.  And we must grow more food for a growing  population tomorrow.  We have the tools and technology to help nations  achieve food security. 'Good safety nets are well targeted to the hungry and tailored to the  circumstances.  For example, the FAO says cash or food stamps are often the best ways to  improve access to food where markets function, while direct food aid or  food-for-work schemes are better where they do not, such as in war- affected regions. Economy ministries working with tight budgets may balk at the cost of such  programmes.  But research shows they should be viewed as investments that  generate their own income streams, rather than welfare, as they increase  demand for local food output and boost the economy.    Agricultural investment is crucial because the FAO says a long-running  decline in this is the main reason why hunger statistics were on the rise even  before the 2007-08 price surges. Smallholders and their families, who number two billion (or almost a third of  the global population), are particularly important because they are a big  chunk of both the problem and the possible solution. Two-thirds of the world's poorest people live in rural areas and depend on  agriculture and related activities for their livelihoods, according to IFAD. But if they are equipped with the appropriate technologies, seeds and know- how needed to improve their yields and cope with climate change, they will  be able to haul themselves out of poverty and contribute to meeting the  growing demand for food of a global population forecast to reach 9. 1 billion  by 2050. Economic growth originating from agriculture is at least twice as effective, on  average, in benefiting the poorest than non-agricultural growth, the FAO  says. One of the successes of 2009 was the commitment the Group of Eight leading  industrial nations made in July to mobilise 20 billion dollars over the next  three years for sustainable agriculture in developing countries.  But perhaps the most positive thing the world takes from an otherwise bleak  old year to work with in the new one is the consensus achieved at the Rome  summit on the need to put agriculture and the plight of smallholders first. 'It's amazing that we have this much consensus,' IFAD assistant president  Kevin Cleaver told IPS.  'I'm in the business of reading and writing strategies  and I've been in this business for a long time, and I've never seen such  consensus from the experts on how to move forward.  At the international  level and among agencies such as IFAD and the World Bank there is a  homogeneity on strategy, that is a big change from the past. '  