In one of the poorest and most populous neighborhoods of Cairo, Hussein  Soliman and his family live in a small apartment that is a model of clean energy  living. The two solar panels and bio-gas unit on the roof of Soliman's building in  Darb El-Ahmar provide hot water and cooking gas to his two-bedroom  apartment, reducing his family's carbon footprint and energy costs.  The clean  energy appliances, made mostly from recycled material, have reduced his  household's waste have meant that 'my gas and electricity bills are much less  than before,' says Soliman.  They shaved nearly 50 percent off the utility bills. Soliman ventured into clean energy in 2008 when he joined Solar CITIES  (Connecting Community Catalysts and Integrating Technologies for Industrial  Ecology Systems), a development initiative spearheaded by U. S.  urban planner  Thomas Culhane.  The project leverages local experience and innovation to  develop cheap and robust clean energy technologies adapted to the rigorous  operating environment of Cairo's poorest neighbourhoods. 'There is no 'one size fits all' in development and part of the problem is  precisely that so-called 'experts' come in and try to promote products and  designs that are inappropriate for the local community,' Culhane tells IPS. Culhane and his German wife, Sybille, have brought on board as innovators  the residents of the low-income neighborhoods in which they hope to make  the greatest impact.  Their designs for solar water heaters and bio-gas  digesters have evolved through experimentation, group brainstorming  sessions, and 'jumping into dumpsters to find materials that might work. 'Using recycled materials, Culhane's team was able to put together a solar  water heating system for under 500 dollars.  The system's solar panels are  built from scrap aluminum, glass, old copper pipes and styrofoam insulation.   It uses two recycled 200-litre shampoo barrels as tanks, one for storing the  water heated by the panels and the other as a backup water supply. Solar CITIES has built 35 solar water heaters in Egypt since 2007.  Most of the  systems, including 30 units built with USAID funding, are installed on  rooftops in underdeveloped areas where frequent power and water cuts cause  commercial systems to break down.  Stacked tanks and a float valve, similar  to the type used in toilets, allow the water heaters to overcome the water  pressure fluctuations that lead to failures. 'It took a lot of experimentation because we had to find placements for cold  and hot water input and output that would balance the changing flow rate,  opening the float valves at the right time,' Culhane says. After a year of operation, Soliman says the only maintenance his homemade  solar water heater has required is a twice-weekly washing of the panels to  remove the dust buildup. 'The panels heat the water, which pipes carry down to the kitchen and  shower,' he explains.  'We only need electricity to heat water in the winter,  and only if we're using it after midnight. 'The bio-gas digester that Soliman assembled on his roof - one of eight built  by the Solar CITIES project - converts organic garbage into cooking gas.   Moldy bread and table scraps are soaked in water overnight, then poured into  a 1,000-litre plastic tank to decompose.  A pipe carries the gas to a burner in  the kitchen, while a spigot drains the effluent, which Soliman sells as organic  fertiliser to upscale garden shops. 'I can use any organic waste from our kitchen to create gas,' Soliman  explains, while pouring a bucket of organic slurry into the tank's intake pipe.   'The digester provides one hour a day of gas in winter, and two hours in  summer. 'The bio-gas unit's capacity for processing organic waste has taken on added  value since the Egyptian government's decision last year to cull the country's  pig population.  Rotting heaps of kitchen waste, previously fed to hogs, have  created a health hazard. 'My garbage man kisses me because I have the cleanest garbage on the  block,' Soliman boasts. Moustafa Hussein, a career counselor for a local community development  project, joined the Solar CITIES project in 2007 after a chance encounter with  Culhane that sold him on the idea.  The solar water heater he built on the roof  of his apartment in Darb El-Ahmar provided hot water for his family until the  dilapidated building collapsed three months ago. His belief in the project unshaken, Hussein is now building another solar  water heater, which he hopes to install on the roof of the temporary  government housing where he now lives.  He also wants to build a bio-gas  unit. 'I'm planning to collect the organic waste from restaurants in the  neighborhood to increase my gas output,' he says.  'I'll give the restaurants  plastic bags and they can separate out the organics, and I'll collect the bags  at the end of each day. 'The biggest obstacle to any project in impoverished neighbourhoods is  economics, says Hussein.  Most area residents subsist on less than two dollars  per day, and credit is difficult to obtain. 'It's hard to convince people here to invest in clean energy,' says Hussein.  'As  a household why should they invest up to 1,000 Egyptian pounds (182  dollars) in bio-gas when it costs just six or seven for a butagas cylinder,  which lasts two weeks and is much easier to handle?'Due to Egypt's heavily subsidised gas and electricity, it may take up to 15  years to recover the costs of a Solar CITIES solar water heater or bio-gas  digester.  The cost recovery time is expected to fall as the government  proceeds with plans to phase out energy subsidies in the coming four to  seven years. Hussein says having people who are part of the community involved gives the  Solar CITIES initiative more credibility.  But the project's success will ultimately  depend on whether it can produce a cheap, durable and efficient model for  the community. 'If the people see a good example, they will tell each other about it,' he says.   'Whether it succeeds of fails, everyone will know the same day. '  