'I don’t know what's going to happen to our people … what our future will be?'Tribal leader Kelak Ubin worries over plans to build a dozen dams in the  pristine, interconnected river ecology of Sarawak, home to many ethnic tribes  in Malaysia and located north-west of Borneo Island. Considered the third largest island in the world, Borneo occupies an area the  size of Singapore and lies at the centre of Maritime South-east Asia.  It is  divided among three countries, namely, Indonesia, Brunei and Malaysia.  At its  north lie Sarawak and the disputed Malaysian state, Sabah. The proposed Sarawak complex of hydroelectric dams is expected to lead to a  forced resettlement of the affected tribal communities to an unfriendly place  as well as to inundation of the state’s vast tracts of rainforest, said to be the  earth’s oldest tropical rainforest.  'Our life . . .  our tradition is all connected to the land.  Our way of life is  inherited from our ancestors,' Ubin told IPS.  'We don’t know any other way of  life. ''Our very existence is under threat.  'They (government officials and private  entrepreneurs) have promised to resettle us and pay us some money, but I  fear our traditional way of life will die with the forest. 'The proposed massive dams are intended to generate cheap electricity and  feed China's rapidly expanding economy on top of Malaysia’s energy- consuming manufacturing industries that are intended to be relocated to the  state.  The complex is expected to have a combined power-generating  capacity of 7,000 megawatts (MW) by 2020, or at least 600 percent more  than the current capacity of the island. A state official, speaking to IPS on condition of anonymity, explained why  exploitation of Sarawak's rivers makes economic sense and moving industries  to the island is a better option: 'Sarawak’s interconnected river system is  unique and unlike any in the world.  The system is the state's greatest wealth  and, if tapped intelligently, will feed industries that need cheap power like  aluminum smelters,' he said. On Jan.  11, the government announced plans between China and Malaysia to  pursue joint venture energy projects amounting to 11 billion U. S.  dollars in  Sarawak.  Malaysian Prime Minister Najib Razak unveiled the plans involving the  government-owned development and investment firm 1Malaysia  Development Berhad (1MDB) and China’s leading power grid operator, the  State Grid Corporation of China (SGCC). 'In a short period of time 1MDB and SGCC, which is China's leading power and  distribution company, will be collaborating to identify and plan a number of  multi-billion-dollar projects,' Najib said in his speech during the  announcement.  He did not identify, however, the projects that would be  undertaken under the joint venture. But government officials, who also declined to be named, said dams and  power plant constructions were among the huge joint projects of the two  firms. 'Sarawak is slated for huge growth and will be transformed within 20 years,'  a senior official involved in financial development and planning told IPS.  'The  focus is on energy sector. 'The Malaysian daily, ‘Star’, has reported that 1MDB and SGCC will establish  hydropower plants similar to the controversial Bakun Dam — located on Balui  River in Sarawak — and a massive aluminum smelter in the same state. The Bakun facility is the forerunner of this huge and ambitious plan to tap  Sarawak’s power for power-intensive industries, state officials also admitted  to IPS. Anti-dam groups said the two-billion-dollar Bakun Dam, which is scheduled  to come online later this year, would engulf a huge tract of the Borneo jungle  in water.  Approved by the government in 1986, the project is nearing  completion after more than two decades of controversy, opposition and  financial constraints triggered by the 1997 Asian crisis.  During intermittent construction of the hydroelectric dam, thousands of  indigenous people were uprooted and moved out of the construction and  immediate catchment area.  Large tracts of rainforests, where natives of the  several tribes lived, were cleared to make way for the dam. When completed, Bakun’s reservoir will cover 695 square kilometres and  power eight turbines.  But for the displaced indigenous people of Sarawak,  Bakun is nothing but endless misery.  Used to a life of farming, fishing and  limited hunting, the tribal people have great difficulty adapting to a cash  economy. 'The government must clarify the development plans for Sarawak and give all  details, especially their impact on the indigenous people,' said Meenakshi  Raman, a senior official of Friends of the Earth Malaysia, a member of an  international grassroots environmental network from which it derives its  name. 'Our primary fear is that these projects involve hugely dirty industries like  aluminum smelters and dams and coal power plants, which all degrade the  environment in Sarawak and threaten the economy and livelihood of the  indigenous people,' she said. The dam has an estimated generation capacity of 2,400 MW, considered  ambitious for Sarawak’s small, agriculture-based economy, which has no use  for such huge generated power. The original Bakun plan was to ship the generated power through undersea  cables across the South China Sea to Peninsular Malaysia.  But those opposed  to the project said it did not make sense because Peninsular Malaysia was  already experiencing a power glut, with numerous independent power  producers queuing up to sell power. Peninsular or West Malaysia, located on the Malay Peninsula, accounts for the  majority of the South-east Asian country’s estimated 28 million population  and economy. Environment activists also argued that the option to lay cables would be  expensive, was fraught with technical uncertainties, and could raise  sovereignty issues if they passed through Indonesian waters. This ambitious and, in the words of some experts, 'foolhardy plan' to use  undersea cables across 1,000 kilometres of open sea appears to have been  abandoned for an equally ambitious plan to bring power-hungry industries to  Sarawak. Senior government officials, who also declined to be named, said the  undersea cable plan is 'all but abandoned. ' But even before the turbines of the Bakun hydro-electric facility begin to turn  later this year, environmentalists and activists continue to sounding the alarm  bells on plans to build 12 more mega-dams in Sarawak, which the  government sees as a major injection into the sluggish economy and an  investment that will deliver political capital as well. Foreign investment in Malaysia plummeted in 2009 as a result of the global  financial crisis.  The 1MDB, which was created in 2008, is aimed at forming  global partnerships to drive Malaysia’s economic growth. 