Barely a month after world leaders gathering in Copenhagen reached a weak  accord on climate change, the European Union's top polluters are fighting a  fresh battle to dissuade policy-makers from taking more robust action. The European Chemical Industry Council (CEFIC), one of the largest corporate  interest groups in Brussels, has begun 2010 by urging the key EU institutions  to refrain from setting more ambitious targets for reducing emissions of  greenhouse gases than those already agreed. Its efforts appear to have paid off.  Spain, the current holder of the Union's  rotating presidency, proposed Wednesday that the EU's negotiating position  in follow-up work to the Copenhagen conference should be no different to  that ahead of the event.  This position committed the 27-strong bloc to  lowering its emissions by 20 percent below 1990 levels by 2020 and only to  increase that target to 30 percent if other major industrial countries pledged  similar cuts.  The Spanish proposal was made to a meeting of EU diplomats tasked with  fleshing out the accord reached in Copenhagen.  The agreement is slated for  finalisation at the end of this month, by which time the world's governments  are supposed to have formally declared their reduction commitments for the  coming decade.  CEFIC says it is opposed to far-reaching unilateral measures by the EU as  these would put energy-intensive firms in Europe at a competitive  disadvantage to their peers elsewhere.  'For us reducing greenhouse gas  emissions is not a beauty contest,' the group's climate specialist Philippe de  Casablanca told IPS.  'It is not worth being the top region of the climate class  if that example does not deliver significant reductions globally.  The contest  can't be won by one player but by all, working together. 'Environmentalists believe, however, that the EU should strive for a 30 percent  reduction goal as a minimum, regardless of whether other big players in the  global economy will emulate it.  They contend that the Union's tactic of  goading outsiders into following its agenda has not worked and that it is now  time for it to lead by example.  Matthias Duwe, director of Climate Action Network Europe, said that the EU  did not demonstrate genuine leadership in Copenhagen and 'seems to be  making the same mistake again right now. 'It is sitting back and waiting for others, when there should be a renewed  sense of urgency,' he added.  CEFIC, which represents some 29,000 firms, has been one of the most  influential lobbying groups in shaping the EU's climate change strategy over  the past few years.  It has joined forces with representatives of other energy- guzzling sectors such as cement and steel makers to warn of a phenomenon  dubbed 'carbon leakage', whereby companies would leave Europe for parts of  the world with less rigorous controls on the amount of carbon dioxide (CO2)  discharged into the atmosphere. The concept was ridiculed by a 2008 study from Climate Strategies, a  network of policy researchers, which found that the companies threatening to  quit Europe tended to base their decisions on where to invest on factors other  than environmental regulations.  Yet CEFIC continued to invoke the concept to  demand that its members be given free permits to pollute under the EU's  emissions trading scheme, which issues licences for the amount of CO2 that  industries may release. The EU's reluctance to set tougher targets for itself comes despite an  admission by one of its most senior officials that the measures envisaged by  the Copenhagen accord do not correspond with those that most scientists  deem necessary to avert a potentially catastrophic rise in global  temperatures. Olli Rehn, a member of the European Commission, said this week that the  agreement 'falls badly short of our goal' to ensure that temperatures do not  climb above two degrees Celsius of pre-industrial levels.  Rehn nonetheless  added: 'The accord is better than no outcome at all, which would have been  the worst case scenario. 'Spain's environment minister Elena Espinosa said it is vital that the EU's  response to the Copenhagen agreement gives a boost to the 'intelligent' use  of energy.  'We want to be the main motor for innovation and  competitiveness,' she told members of the European Parliament Jan.  20.  But the Word Wide Fund for Nature (WWF) complained that the Union's lack of  ambition is hampering it from championing the development of more  ecologically friendly forms of technology than those currently in use.  The  WWF's Jason Anderson said that by sticking to its 20 percent reduction target,  the EU would actually be slowing down the pace of CO2 cuts set in the past  three years.   'By failing to take on a target of 30 percent or more we are foregoing massive  energy savings that will improve Europe's economy and lead to the creation  of new jobs in industries that have a long future,' said Anderson.  'The EU has  always made its mark on the world stage by leading from the front.  Shifting  expectations to what other countries need to do before the EU moves further  is not only lacking in influence, it means foregoing real benefits at home.   There is no reason to hold Europe's economic future hostage to decisions  made in Washington or Beijing. ' 