'It is a fact that global warming is happening.  If the Arctic Sea ice is melting,  how can the Himalayan glaciers not be melting?' glaciologist Syed Iqbal Hasnain  asked indignantly. Amid the brouhaha over last week’s retraction by a United Nations body of its  2007 report that the Himalayan glaciers were disappearing by 2035, global  warming sceptics quickly seized on the error, noting the rash of media  reports on the issue, which they believed bolstered their position. But Hasnain, who found himself at the centre of the Himalayan meltdown  controversy, said it is 'ridiculous' to assume that the glaciers are not melting.  The scientist was reported as having given the year 2035 for the  disappearance of Himalayan glaciers due to global warming in a 1999  interview with a British publication, ‘New Scientist’.  The Inter-governmental  Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) picked up the date from the ensuing article  and reported it eight years later in its 2007 Fourth Assessment Report, only to  retract it last week. In the IPCC report, the United Nations body said the phenomenon of climate  change would melt most Himalayan glaciers by 2035, which was taken from  the ‘New Scientist’ article published in 1999, according to the British  broadsheet ‘Sunday Times’ in its Jan.  17 issue.  The article was based on a  telephone interview with Hasnain by the journal’s writer, Fred Pearce. IPCC, which assesses valuable information on climate change, won the 2007  Nobel Peace Prize along with former U. S.  Vice-President Al Gore. Hasnain, who denied ever having given the 2035 time frame to the writer,  said Pearce has gone on record in the same ‘Sunday Times’ article, saying a  1999 report prepared by the scientist, which he read, 'does not mention 2035  as a date by which any Himalayan glacier will melt. ' Hasnain, a senior fellow at The Energy and Resources Institute (TERI), said the  date cited in the ‘New Scientist’ article was a 'journalistic assumption  interpolated by the interviewer over which I had no control. ' Hasnain gave IPS a synthesis of recent scientific studies on the Himalayan  glaciers.  Titled ‘Synthesis of Recent Studies on Himalayan Glaciers,’ his report  sums up scientific research done in the last decade, proving that the  Himalayan glaciers are receding.  Glaciers in eastern and central Himalayas are especially sensitive to present  atmospheric warming due to their summer snow-accumulation system, said  the glaciologist’s report, citing a 1984 study by Yasunari Ageta and K.   Higuchi. An increase in summer air temperature not only enhances ice melt but also  significantly reduces the accumulation by altering snowfall according to  rainfall.  In contrast, ‘winter-accumulation type’ glaciers receive their main  accumulation at lower temperatures and are thus less sensitive to air  temperature increase, said Hasnain’s report further.  The Himalayas, located between the Indian subcontinent and the Tibetan  Plateu, comprise the world’s highest mountain range, including Mount  Everest.  It is home to more than 15,000 glaciers. A 2009 study on glacial melt by a team of scientists led by A.  Shukla used  optical satellite sensor data to gauge that the Samundratapu glacier in  Lahaul-Spiti, Himachal Pradesh in northern India, has deglaciated by 13. 7  square kilometres in the last 41 years, with the snout retreating about 588  metres.  The scientists concluded that all changes appeared to be linked to  climate warming.  The issue of climate change has been on the forefront of vigorous  discussions worldwide and the focus of earnest efforts by the international  community to deal with its impact, including rapid glacier melting that has  been known to trigger a wave of natural disasters. Late last year, a flurry of emails sent out by climate scientists at the University  of East Anglia in Britain, claiming some statistical data had been rigged to  prove climate change, caused a public uproar.  The scientists at the heart of  the controversy said their emails were hacked and taken out of context. Hasnain said vested interests are trying to denigrate scientists who are  'diligently doing their best to research the issue. ' Collecting and collating scientific evidence on glacial retreat in the Himalayas  has been both physically near impossible and technically difficult.  According  to the Kathmandu-based International Centre for Integrated Mountain  Development (ICIMOD) there are still no systematic measurements of glacial  mass balance in the Himalayan region.  China is the only country in the region that has been conducting long-term  mass balance studies of some glaciers.  It will expand this study to more  Himalayan glaciers in future, said ICIMOD.  In November 2009, accompanying a group of international journalists to  Khardung La, India’s highest pass, to observe the state of receding glaciers,  Hasnain showed scientific evidence of glacial retreat at Chota Sigri in  Himachal Pradesh, Drang Drung in Zanskar region of Ladakh, and in East  Rathong in the eastern Himalaya.  Chota Sigri showed a sharp decline in the annual mass balance, with the  glacier moving at 40 m per year in the higher reaches and at 25 m each year  in the lower reaches.  'It is definitely shrinking,' Hasnain told the group of European, American and  South Asian journalists.  Along with Dr.  Veerabhadra Ramanathan of the Scripps Institute of  Oceanography at Woods Hole, Massachusetts, Hasnain also presented  scientific evidence of how black carbon aerosols, contributing to the  ‘atmospheric brown cloud’ phenomenon, was depositing itself on the  Himalayan snows and causing temperature rise to accelerate even further  than 'normal' global warming. In India, the Ministry of Environment and Forests appears to feel vindicated  over its charge, made mid-2009, that the IPCC view had been 'alarmist. '  IPCC chairman Rajendra Pachauri, who is also the director of TERI, had  described the Ministry’s report as based on ‘voodoo science’.  The embarrassing debacle over the projected date of disappearance of the  Himalayan glaciers has clouded discussions on the poor state of these ice  masses, especially the smaller ones. In Ladakh, in India’s northernmost state of Jammu and Kashmir, retired rural  development civil engineer Chewang Norphel quietly refutes claims that there  is insufficient scientific data to prove that India’s glaciers are receding.  'I am the scientific data,' said Norphel.  'I have seen, for instance, the size of  the Khardung La glacier since I was a child: it was solid ice then,' he told the  international journalists’ group in November 2009.   Norphel, known popularly as India’s ‘glacier man’, has been building high- altitude water-conservation channels that freeze over as ‘artificial glaciers’ to  beat the lack of water from the receding Himalayan glaciers.   	 The Khardung La glacier is one example of Ladakh’s melting glaciers, barely  recognisable now as a glacier.  Over 70 percent of Ladakh district’s water  supply is sourced in springtime from the melting snows off glaciers and is  the sole source of water for irrigation for its remote mountain communities.  But in recent years, rising temperatures believed to have been spawned by  climate change have resulted in decreasing snowfall in the upper-reach  ‘accumulation’ zones of these glaciers, leading to reduced waters in the  springtime.  A survey of 20 villages and 211 individuals over 65 years of age in Ladakh  district, done by the French non-government organisation GERES (Groupe  Energies Renouvelables, Environnement et Solidarités) showed over 90  percent of them saying that winters were now warmer.  Metereological data analysed from 1973 onwards by GERES shows a rise of 1  degree Celsius in the winter months in Ladakh, coupled with a sharp decline  in snowfall and an equally sharp increase in mean summer temperatures in  July, August and September.  The changing temperatures have already begun impacting the region’s  biodiversity and its communities, said the international conservation  organisation Worldwide Fund for Nature (WWF). 'The breeding of the bar-headed goose and the Black-necked crane has not  been on schedule in recent years,' said Nisa Khatoon, project officer of WWF  at Leh.  She added that migration routes of communities on the Tsokar lake at Leh,  which weave the world-famous Pashmina shawls, 'have become more  frequented as these pastoral communities migrate due to degrading  pastures. ' 