The road to the world’s first tiger summit in Vladivostok later this year will have  to be paved with answers about the future of tiger farms in China and other East  Asian countries, said conservationists. Pressure to place such farms on the agenda at the September summit in the  Russian city stems from the estimated 5,000 domesticated tigers in China’s  tiger farms, which exceed the total number of tigers living in the wild — about  3,200 — in the forests of 13 Asian countries. 'The issue of tiger farms will have to be discussed before the Vladivostok  summit,' said Michael Baltzer, leader of the World Wildlife Fund’s (WWF) tiger  initiative.  'Closing tiger farms is a very complex issue.  What are you going to  do with the tigers?''The Chinese government is showing commitment to monitor the farms and  to continue a ban on the trade of tiger parts,' Baltzer told IPS.  'But they are  not going as far as closing the farms.  We have to take this issue step by step. 'The Asian giant imposed a 1993 ban on the trade of the endangered big cats,  which also included stiff sentences for violators and an order for pharmacies  to clear their shelves of medicines with tiger parts. Russian Prime Minister Vladmir Putin and World Bank President Robert  Zoellick will co-host the tiger summit, which seeks to attract new financial  commitments to implement programmes across the 13 tiger range countries  to save the wild cat that numbered some 100,000 at the beginning of the  1900s. The fate of the tiger farms, however, was not on the formal agenda of Asia’s  first ministerial meeting on tigers, which ended Friday in Hua Hin, a beach  resort town south of Bangkok.  The ministerial meeting, slated for Jan.  27-29,  is part of a drive led by the World Bank to conserve one of Asia’s iconic  predators through its Global Tiger Initiative (GTI). The meeting succeeded in getting governments from all 13 tiger range  countries to commit to ensure a doubling of the wild tiger population by  2022.  These countries are Bangladesh, Bhutan, Burma (or Myanmar),  Cambodia, China, India, Indonesia, Laos, Malaysia, Nepal, Russia, Thailand  and Vietnam. The Bank did not remain silent on the issue of East Asian tiger farms, though,  given its public statements against such ill treatment of tigers since the GTI  was launched in June 2008.  'It wasn’t discussed as part of this ministerial  conference’s agenda, but we have expressed our concerns,' said Keshav  Varma, programme director for GTI.  'The farms are quite contrary to  conservation. ''Our position is not specific to China or Thailand or Vietnam,' Varma said in  an interview with IPS.  'Tiger farms create a perverse trade in tiger parts and it  can expand demand.  Any tendency that feeds such demand will affect tigers  in the wild. ' The tiger farms, which are used to meet the demand for tiger parts, are found  in China, Laos, Thailand and Vietnam.  Almost every part of the tiger caters to  an increasing demand that has come with rising affluence in East Asia.   Besides the well-known trade in tiger skins, tiger bones are used for wines  and powdered Chinese medicines, some parts to cure skin diseases while the  tiger penis is sought as an aphrodisiac. The illegal trade in wild tiger parts is part of a booming illegal wildlife trade,  which is reported to be the world’s third largest illegal trade after arms and  drugs.  Interpol estimates the annual value of the trade to be between 10 and  20 billion U. S.  dollars.  Supporters of tiger farms have reportedly argued that such ventures help to  curb the illegal trade of wild tiger parts by limiting supply to the domesticated  predators bred for such trade. Conservationists pooh-pooh such thinking.  'That is completely bogus,' said  Nirmal Ghosh, a writer and trustee of the Corbett Foundation, which works  with the largest wild tiger population in northern India.  'If tiger farms sell  tiger parts, a black market will develop for wild tiger parts. 'An equal fear, Ghosh revealed to IPS, is a trading pattern that will see wild  tiger parts infiltrating the market meant for farmed tiger parts.  'This is what  happened with the ivory trade, where (the banned trade of) Asian ivory was  trafficked to pass off as African ivory following its legalisation. 'Yet while the Bank may win praise for turning the heat on tiger farms, it is up  against conservationists who question the Washington D. C. -based financial  institution’s commitment to save the wild tiger by protecting its natural  habitat.  After all, the final statement coming out of the GTI-supported  ministerial meeting pledged to stop pushing ahead with development  projects, such as building roads and bridges, if they damage tiger habitats. 'Even a cursory examination of the impact of World Bank lending (in India) for  (coal) mines, dams and roads reveals that wildlife and wildlife habitat have  always been acceptable collateral damage for Bank executives searching for  locations to push lucrative projects,' said Bittu Sahgal, editor of ‘Sanctuary  Asia’, one of India’s leading wildlife news magazines.  'This organisation has  evolved strategies to ‘engage’ with civil society, while conspiring with big  business and politicians to hammer through destructive projects. ''India is littered with failed or failing World Bank dam projects, including the  Rihand Dam at Singrauli (district of Madhya Pradesh state), which was  originally meant for irrigation and power generation, but was reduced to  serving as a reservoir for toxic waste and to supplying cooling water for  thermal plants,' Sahgal charged in an e-mail interview.  'The list of World Bank projects damaging forests and ecosystems,  threatening fisheries and harming endangered species, is long. ' 