A salty, crunchy salad herb known to gourmands as samphire could  revolutionise agriculture in the Middle East by providing food, fodder and fuel  without using a single drop of freshwater. Salicornia, a succulent plant that can grow in either fresh or salt water, has  traditionally been seen as a source of food.  However, with rising energy  prices and increasing concern over global warming, the halophyte (salt- tolerant plant) is now prized for its other properties. According to researchers at the University of Arizona, salicornia seeds are  about 30 percent oil by weight, nearly double the oil content of soybean.  The  seeds can be harvested and pressed to make vegetable oil, or processed to  yield agrofuel that may soon fuel airplanes. The remaining 70 percent of salicornia's oilseed biomass can be used as  protein feed for livestock, while the plant's stalks can be used as fodder or  building material. 'Salicornia could add a new dimension to agriculture,' says Hassan El-Shaer,  president of the International Society for Halophyte Utilisation (ISHU).  'The  plant thrives in saltwater, so it can be cultivated intensively and irrigated in  areas where the water and land are too saline for traditional agriculture. 'The consequences for the Middle East are staggering, he says.  Introducing  salt-tolerant crops such as salicornia could utilise millions of hectares of  unproductive arid land while conserving valuable freshwater resources and  providing both material and economic returns to local inhabitants.  But before  this can happen, the plant must first prove its commercial viability. Early attempts at commercial cultivation were not successful.  The Arabian  Saline Water Technology Company (Behar) established a 300-hectare project  on Saudi Arabia's northern coast in 1993 that irrigated salicornia with  seawater to produce vegetable oil and fodder.  The company also ran an  experimental farm that integrated aquaculture with salicornia cultivation to  produce shrimp, fish, oilseeds and animal feed. The farms operated for several years but closed down due to limited demand  for agro-mass at the time, says Behar chairman Adil Bushnak. However, demand has surged in recent years as governments and industries  seek low-carbon energy sources that do not compete with food crops for  land or water resources.  Commercial projects, including one already  operational in northern Mexico, are growing salicornia as agrofuel feedstock  for the aviation sector. In January the Masdar Institute of Science and Technology (MIST), Honeywell's  UOP, Boeing, and Etihad Airways announced plans to establish a salicornia  plantation in the United Arab Emirates to produce agrofuel for airplanes.  The  project will engineer an ecosystem comprised of fish ponds, salicornia fields  and mangrove swamps. 'The overall approach is an integrated system where the wastes of one  process become the inputs of another,' explains Scott Kennedy, an associate  professor at MIST.  'Fish and shrimp raised in aquaculture (ponds) will  produce organic fertiliser for fields of salicornia irrigated with saltwater.  The  runoff from these fields will nourish mangrove swamps, which in turn provide  habitat for small fish. 'The experimental 200-hectare integrated seawater agricultural system (ISAS)  will be established on the salt flats near Abu Dhabi with commercial  production expected to begin within five years, Kennedy told IPS.  Salicornia  oil will be processed to create fuel for airplanes, while the chaff will be used  as livestock feed or burned to produce electricity. A key aspect of the integrated system is that it is, in theory at least, carbon- neutral. 'The mangroves provide a permanent sink for the sequestration of carbon,'  Kennedy explains.  'They store carbon dioxide from the atmosphere as they  grow, offsetting the carbon generated by the burning of the biofuel  (agrofuel). 'Qatar Science and Technology Park, Qatar Petroleum and Qatar Airways  recently announced a similar project in which they intend to develop  'economically viable and sustainable' agrofuels for the aviation industry.  The  group has not yet decided on a feedstock, but is reported to be investigating  salicornia cultivation. El-Shaer hopes commercial interest in salicornia agrofuel will drive local  projects to develop coastal regions of the Middle East that are inhospitable to  traditional farming.  He has drawn up a proposal for cultivation in Egypt's  Sinai Peninsula, where salinity is the biggest obstacle to agriculture. 'The underground water in this area is highly saline and cannot be used for  traditional crops,' he says.  'Introducing a cash crop like salicornia would  allow the Bedouin who live in Sinai to produce oil for cooking or industry, or  bio-energy.  They could also use the byproducts of oil extraction as feed for  their livestock instead of bringing it from the Nile Valley, which is very  expensive. 'Some of the harvest could also be exported to Europe, where salicornia - or  samphire as it is better known - is an ingredient in haute cuisine. El-Shaer says similar projects could green deserts all over the world,  improving the living standards of some of the world's poorest communities. 'Salicornia is a very promising crop,' he says.  'Really, it is the hope of the  world. ' 