Developing countries must tone down the booming voice bureaucrats have in  policies and target corruption if commitments to defeat hunger are to be turned  into action, leaders and experts at a United Nations meeting said Wednesday. The Group of Eight leading industrial nations pledged to devote 20 billion  dollars to agricultural aid over three years last July while the international  community agreed on the need to reverse the long-running decline in  investment in the sector at November's World Food Security Summit in Rome. While many developing nations and non-governmental organisations were  disappointed rich countries did not stump up more money, others players say  these commitments can translate into significant progress in bringing the  number of hungry people down from 1. 02 billion with the right approach. A big part of that means making sure agricultural programmes are tailored to  the needs of small-holder farmers, participants agreed at a high-level panel  at the annual Governing Council of the U. N. 's International Fund for  Agricultural Development (IFAD). 'In agriculture the principle stakeholder, the farmer, must be involved in  policy formulation,' Ajay Vashee, president of the International Federation of  Agricultural Producers (IFAP), told IPS. 'They need to be able to demand the type of policies that would better enable  them to remain viable in agriculture.  All along you have some bureaucrats  driving policy thinking that's probably what they want.  Or you might have a  donor or an NGO coming in and saying this is probably what they want.  But  no one bothers or has the ability to find a farmer who can say what they  need. 'Campaigning by IFAD and its sister Rome-based food agencies, the Food and  Agriculture Organisation (FAO) and the World Food Programme (WFP), has  helped forge an international consensus on the importance of small-holder  farmers for food security. Small-holders are frequently exposed to hunger as the rural poor make up  three-quarters of all undernourished people, IFAD says. But the world will also need its 500 million small-holders, who already  provide for around two billion people, to reach their full productive potential  to achieve a 70 percent increase in food output estimated to be required by a  global population likely to reach 9. 1 billion by 2050. 'When rural populations are given the opportunity to determine their own  destiny, they take it,' IFAD president Kanayo Nwanze told reporters before the  panel meeting on turning the summit pledges into reality.  'We need to help  them build strong community associations so they have a voice. 'Vashee said cooperatives are important to give farmers this collective voice  with the added bonus that they also provide the opportunity for them to  organise themselves and reach markets together that they would be unable to  get to alone. 'The challenge is to get farmers to articulate their needs,' he said.  'Because  there are vast numbers of farmers involved, it's better to organise farmers  into groups that will allow them a platform or a forum where they can  internally discuss (their needs) and put out a concerted position to say to  policy-makers that 'this is what we want'. 'What it means is that we have to spend some resources to get them  organised and that could lead to them building up into economically viable  units as cooperatives as well. 'Policies must take account of farmers' needs in terms of the tools, know-how  and seeds required to increase yields and cope with the effects of climate  change, and rural infrastructure requirements such as small roads that enable  them to take their crops to market, development experts say. Countries such as Tanzania are trying reform their government and  administrative set-ups to make them more receptive to these demands. 'We have started a process of decentralisation to take power from the centre  to the communities through the local governments they make up themselves  through electoral processes,' Tanzania Prime Minister Mizengo Pinda told IPS'Secondly we have introduced a mechanism to make sure poor farmers have a  say over some of these critical issues that affect their lives.  We cannot put  anything into the budget unless it originates from the people themselves.   That budget process has empowered these people to be sure that what they  want is what goes into the budget. 'Now they are coming up with suggestions for the (political) machinery. 'Pinda, whose government launched its 'Kilimo Kwanza' (Agriculture First)  programme last year, also stressed that developing countries should not  expect the wealthier nations to solve their hunger problems for them. He said they must assume their responsibilities by making priorities of  nutrition, agriculture and the war on graft, so that resources do not get  diverted into the pockets of corrupt officials, in order to repeat the food  security success stories of countries such as Brazil and Vietnam. 'If you really want to assist your poor people, corruption should be one of the  areas you focus on,' he said. 'Combating corruption goes hand in hand with development.  If you have a  corrupt government, corrupt leaders, they won't do anything for their people,  they'll think only about themselves. 'Members of the high-level panel conceded there was still some confusion  about how much of the 20 billion dollars the G8 promised last year was new  money, and about monitoring of whether the pledges were actually being  followed through. NGOs are wary about these promises after past failures to deliver. Indeed, an Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD)  report said on Wednesday that there would be a 21 billion dollar deficit  between the aid promised by most of the world's wealthiest countries for this  year at a G8 summit in 2005 and actual donations. But Nwanze said the cash pledged at last year's L'Aquila G8 summit was  starting to materialise, citing the example of his own agency's budget  increasing by 67 percent to 1. 2 billion dollars for the 2010-2012 period with  some countries doubling or even tripling their contributions. 'We do actually have more money,' IFAD assistant president Kevin Cleaver  told IPS. 'I know that the press has become fascinated with the fact that there is not as  much as has been promised.  But there's definitely more money available than  in 2008 and the question is how we use this money efficiently and effectively  to address food security problems. 'Let's get off the business of begging for more money.  It's unlimited, the  need for money.  Let's use the money that we have, which are billions - it's  disputed, but we definitely have billions - efficiently to address the problem. '  