Edgar Borras sifts through his remaining possessions in a demolished shanty  beside a Manila waterway, preparing to bring them to his wife and 12-year-old  son who now live in a remote relocation site in a province outside the Philippine  capital.    'They want to come back here.  They don’t like it there.  It’s too far,' Borras  said in an interview, referring to the site in Calauan in Laguna province, some  74 km away.    Before a November 2009 government order to move flood-prone informal  settlements after the fury of tropical storm Ketsana in September last year,  Borras’ family had lived for 12 years in a tiny dwelling on the east bank of the  Manggahan floodway, an artificial channel that discharges water from the  Marikina River to Laguna de Bay, the country's biggest lake.    Despite its hazardous location, their home served the family well because of  its proximity to his son’s school and to the Makati City Hall, where the 37- year-old Borras works as a security guard.     To stay close to his place of work, he now lives in the workers’ barracks and  sees his family in Calauan twice a month during his days off.    But while efforts to reduce vulnerability to disasters is laudable, Borras’  situation exposes the bias against the urban poor -- many of whom provide  key services as street cleaners, factory workers, garbage collectors and others  in this capital of nearly 12 million people — as the main cause of urban blight  and pollution, among other problems.    Likewise, the relocation of informal settlers revives an unresolved debate  about how to manage this community, which makes up a good chunk of  urban populations in the Philippines and other Asian countries.    It also ignores the wider consideration of the urban poor’s role in the  country’s economy and society, where they are an unacknowledged engine  that provides essential urban labour.  By some estimates, the urban poor  make up 5 million or more than 40 percent of Metro Manila’s population.    'They can’t afford decent housing near their work places, so they would  rather stay in danger areas near work rather than in distant relocation with  secure housing (but) with no means of livelihood and access to work,'  explains Jocelyn Vicente-Angeles, executive director of the Community  Organisation of the Philippines Enterprise Foundation (COPE), which  campaigns against evictions of informal settlers and the urban poor.    Angeles says that government’s efforts to clean waterways of easement  encroachment has been focused on urban poor communities along  riverbanks, with the logic that the urban poor are in danger areas and the  major pollutants of waterways.  'But why not also demolish establishments  and big business infrastructures along the river banks?' asks Angeles.    After the massive floods brought by Ketsana, which were the worst the  country had seen in over four decades, the Philippine government decided to  relocate thousands of families living near the Napindan Channel, which  connects Laguna de Bay to the Pasig River and the Manila Bay, as well as the  Manggahan Floodway, where Borras lives.    The storm, which also ravaged neighbouring countries like Vietnam, left  over 300 dead and displaced at least 450,000 people in the Philippines.    In November, President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo issued an executive order  for the relocation of 100,000 families deemed to be living in flood-prone  areas along the rivers and waterways.     The Philippines’ environment department declared that the land many of  these communities were living on, which had been proclaimed for low-cost  housing for informal settlers and landless urban poor, was no longer suitable  for such because it was low-lying and thus prone to heavy flooding.  'There is  an urgency to address flooding in Metro Manila by removing obstructions and  rehabilitating waterways,' the order added.    But urban blight and pollution in Manila cannot be attributed only to the  urban poor, analysts say.    In a discussion paper, the local research and advocacy group Institute for  Popular Democracy (IPD) points out that factories that discharge their waste  into rivers and richer residential subdivisions that contribute to effluents in  the country’s predominantly sewer-less cities are hardly blamed for pollution  woes.    Only 5 percent of Metro Manila’s households are connected to a sewerage  network, according to the World Health Organisation.  This means that  pollution and waste woes are literally everyone’s waste, IPD points out.  For groups campaigning on urban poor issues, the post-Ketsana relocation  efforts bring to mind an argument they have been making for some time -  that large-scale off-city resettlement is never a sustainable solution because  the lack of jobs in relocation sites undercuts the livelihood needs of  residents.  IPD points to in-city relocation as a much cheaper alternative to distant  relocation in terms of housing and livelihood.  Inefficient land-use patterns  and the use of public and private land near riverbanks could be considered  for use as social housing sites in the city, it adds. Redevelopment, instead of resettlement to far-away places, is a more realistic  approach, says Vicky Morante, a resident of the western bank of the  Manggahan floodway for 18 years and head of a women’s alliance in the area. 'There are other solutions to the problem instead of evicting us.  They could  have evened out the land with soil or put a dyke in waterways to prevent  flooding,' she explained.  'Or they could tap into idle lands for in-city  socialised housing. ' On their own initiative, Morante and other community leaders are looking for  idle land in nearby areas to recommend as relocation sites.  She herself is  considering renting a house nearby, at double the cost, instead of moving her  whole family to the Calauan relocation site. COPE’s Angeles says that the urban poor should not be deprived of a decent  space to live in.  'Imagine a city without drivers, labanderas (washerwomen),  street sweepers, ordinary government and private employees, vendors and  labourers.  It is just proper for the government to provide decent and  affordable houses in city and/or near-city relocation,' she explains.    Borras’ neighbours were given until the end of February to demolish their  homes by themselves and move to the Calauan site.  Some have moved out of  fear that their homes would be demolished anyway or that the units in the  new site would run out.  But more have chosen to stay put for now.    'I pity the people who moved there who can’t find any decent jobs.  A lot of  them are returning because they can’t find work.  I’m lucky to have kept my  job here in the city,' Borras says, adding that parts of the Calauan site lack  services like water or electricity.    As a security guard, Borras works a night shift of 12 hours a day for a salary  of 6,100 pesos (about 132 U. S.  dollars) for every 15 days.  Still, Borras is  uncertain about his family’s future.  His meagre salary is stretched to the limit  by the cost of supporting two households and added transportation and  communication costs.    Water used to cost the Borras family 180 pesos (nearly 4 dollars) a month in  Manila, but costs 600 pesos (14 dollars) or more than three times more in the  relocation site.   From spending 150 pesos (3. 52 dollars) a day for the family’s  meals, Borras now allots about 400 pesos (9. 4 dollars) each time his family  goes to market, and sets aside money to buy his own meals.     The two to three-hour trip through dusty roads and heavy traffic from  Manila to Laguna costs Borras 300 pesos (7 dollars) roundtrip.  He spends  another 100 pesos (2. 34 dollars) a week on mobile phone calls and text  messages with his family.   'My expenses have really doubled.   We aren’t able  to save anything,' he laments.    'They (the government) should ensure that the place they’re relocating  people to is developed enough so people can find jobs,' Borras muses.  'If  they can’t find jobs there, they’ll just eventually come back to the cities. '  