A plan to give the European Union's lending arm a beefed-up mandate for  financing the fight against climate change has drawn a sceptical response from  campaigners on green and economic justice issues. As part of a series of reforms being considered for the European Investment  Bank (EIB), a team of so-called wise persons recommended in late February  that the Luxembourg-based institution should distribute loans worth 2  billion euros (2. 7 billion dollars) to projects focusing on climate change  between 2011 and 2013.  The recipients of these loans would include  schemes aimed at helping poor countries adapt to droughts and other  extreme weather conditions.  The team, led by Michel Camdessus, a former managing director of the  International Monetary Fund, believes that releasing these loans would have  'an exemplary value' as it would give the EIB's work a greater prominence in  Asia, Africa and Latin America.  Camdessus had been asked to evaluate activities financed by the bank  outside the EU's borders after its work encountered severe criticism from the  European Parliament.  This criticism was reflected in a 2008 ruling by the  European Court of Justice, which ordered a redesign of the bank's lending  facility for foreign countries because it did not respect the stated objective of  the EU's international development work, namely to reduce poverty.  Since that ruling, the EIB has been eager to increase its lending and has  identified climate change as one of its priorities.  During 2009, its total loan  portfolio came to 79 billion euros, an increase of 37 percent over the  previous year, with almost 9 billion euros of its loans going to countries  outside the EU. Campaigners who have exposed many of the bank's flaws say that efforts to  give it greater responsibility for social development or environmental projects  could prove detrimental.  Alex Wilks, a veteran anti-poverty activist, argued  that some of the suggestions of the 'wise persons' are 'not so wise' because  they fail to realise that loans, which have to be repaid, are not the best means  for financing healthcare or sanitation improvements. 'The EIB is primarily an investment bank,' he told IPS.  'It should not and  cannot try to transform itself overnight into a social development institution. 'Wilks is the author of a report titled 'Corporate welfare and development  deceptions: Why the European Investment Bank is failing to deliver outside the  EU'.  It says that allowing the EIB to have a greater say on climate change  projects would be a 'mistake' because the governments of developing  countries have stressed that the resources they need must be provided  through grants, not loans. Furthermore, his paper highlights how the bank lacks the expertise needed to  take on greater responsibility for protecting the environment or fighting  poverty.  Over 90 percent of the energy-related projects it finances in  developing countries rely on fossil fuels, a principal source of greenhouse gas  emissions, while it has routinely paid greater attention to promoting the  interests of European firms, than on nurturing local industry.  In 2008, just 7  percent of the bank's loans to countries in Africa, the Caribbean and the  Pacific went to their home-grown companies.  Philippe Maystadt, the EIB president, said last month that the bank 'has  already substantially increased its lending in support of the EU's climate goals  and stands ready to do more if asked. 'The idea of allocating more loans to climate-related projects is being  discussed as part of efforts to secure a new international agreement on global  warming - something that the world's leaders were unable to achieve during  the United Nations-sponsored talks in Copenhagen at the end of last year.   But Wilks said that policy-makers are suffering from a 'delusion' if they think  that releasing more EIB loans will increase the likelihood that such an accord  can be pieced together. Caterina Amicucci from the Campaign for the Reform of the World Bank in  Rome indicated she had no confidence in the EIB's claims to be concerned  about the environment.  She cited several examples, in which the EIB had  allocated money to controversial projects, without properly consulting the  communities who would be directly affected by them and without properly  assessing their likely impacts on the environment.  One 'clear case of incoherence' between the EIB's work and the EU's broader  development aid activities, she said, was the bank's support for mining in  Zambia.  Whereas a plan drawn up by EU officials identified transport,  infrastructure, health and other areas of 'human development' as the  priorities for the Union's aid activities for Zambia in the 2008-13 period,  most of the EIB's loans for that country have gone to mining.  That was  despite how the mining sector was not viewed as an official priority in the  EU's aid plan.  Camdessus' team has also advocated that a feasibility study should be  undertaken on establishing a new European bank for international  development that would carry out many of the EIB's tasks. Anders Lustgarten, a campaigner with the Bretton Woods Project, which  monitors the activities of major financial institutions said he was not  convinced that a new 'mega-bank' of the type suggested by Camdessus  would bring tangible improvements to the lot of the poor.  'Deng Xiaoping (the late Chinese leader) said: 'It doesn't matter if a cat is  black or white, so long as it catches mice',' Lustgarten added.  'If - instead of  cats catching mice - you have pigeons ignoring mice, you are not going to  reach your objectives.  The question is one of whether a new mega-bank  would be capable of delivering real development for poor people.  Based on  our experience with other mega-banks, we have serious questions. '  