As a wife of a rice farmer and mother of two children aged nine and two,  Sanjeevani Bandara’s days are packed with chores.  Yet while she used to be able  to keep up with all she has to do in a day, this Sri Lankan mother now finds  herself struggling to accomplish even the most basic tasks.    Blame it on the weather, which has been causing water shortages that force  Bandara to spend more and more time fetching water for her family, farther  away from home.    While the volume of annual rainfall in Sri Lanka has not changed, agriculture  specialist Champa Navaratna says that weather patterns are changing to  high-intensity rain for short periods, causing floods, landslides and long  periods of drought — which in turn result in water problems.    A water crisis has a grim impact on this South Asian country’s women,  whose long list of household chores includes securing and managing the  family’s water supply.  In rural areas, that can include ensuring a steady  source for the family’s crops.    Water expert Kusum Athukorala, chairwoman of the Colombo-based  Network of Women Water Professionals (NetWater), even says that the impact  of scarce water resources on women is at the heart of the water issue.  A  shortage, she says, 'makes their life harder and more so because they are not  part of the decision-making process'.    Bandara, for instance, says that wells in her village in Kurunegala, in Sri  Lanka’s north central region, have been running dry far too often.  She has  thus been forced to cycle more than two kilometres for water, carrying it  gingerly back in an earthen pot each time.    'I have to go about six times a day to collect water for the family,' she says,  adding that she leaves her two-year-old with her husband or a friend  whenever she has to fetch more water.      Activists say Bandara can still consider herself lucky because at least she  can load her pots of water onto a bicycle.  Many other women walk the  distance from home to water source and back.  By comparison, says Lanka  Rainwater Harvesting Forum director Thanuja Ariyananda, 'men transport it  in trucks or motorcycles'.    Just about 35 percent of Sri Lanka’s 20 million people receive pipe-borne  water provided by a state agency.  The rest get their supply from wells, rivers  or streams.  Water for agriculture, mainly rice farming, is provided through a  system of canals channeled from rivers and streams.    Securing a steady supply of water has thus been a perennial problem for  most Sri Lankan households, but the situation has become more desperate of  late.  Many Sri Lankans now sound like Jeevani Fernando, a grassroots  environmentalist from Negombo, about 30 km north of Colombo on the west  coast, who says there is a shortage of water in several areas in her locality.    'Rivers are running dry and pipe-borne water to most homes is reduced to  two to three hours a day,' she says.  'As a result of this there are many  problems for women owing to the impact on school-going children, their  food and education, and washing of clothes. '   Part of the problem, say experts, is that the storage capacity of reservoirs  that provide much of the pipe-borne water is limited and cannot take the full  complement of high-intensity rains.  This results in a run-off into the ocean,  which also occurs due to floods.    'There is also a problem of siltation in the reservoir, which then further  reduces its capacity,' adds Navaratna.    It has not helped that the country’s planners have been slow to respond to  the crisis.  For some time now, they have being discussing enhancing rain- harvesting schemes, but that is as far as they have gone.     At the same time, Athukorala notes that discussions on water issues by  local authorities or other agencies barely include women and their concerns.   'Everyone takes water for granted, even female parliamentarians,' she says.   'Their response to access to water is to provide pipe-borne water without  realising that water resources are gradually getting scarce. '    The task of picking up the slack in policy and action has been taken up by  non-government organisations.  The Lanka Rainwater Harvesting Forum, for  instance, has tried to ease the women’s water burden by donating to selected  areas pumpkin-type ferro-cement tanks that are placed above or below the  ground.     The rainwater filters into these 5,000-litre tanks from the roof during the  rainy season and can be used sparingly for about 50 days during the dry  season.  So far, groups like the Forum have donated a total of 35,000  rainwater tanks.    These, however, are mere stopgap solutions that serve a very limited  population at best.  In the meantime, the water crisis seems to be getting  more complex.    Forum director Thanuja Ariyananda, for one, says that the quality of water  has become an issue as well.     She cites the high mineral content in water in northern-central and eastern  parts of Sri Lanka, which she says causes 'the teeth of children get  discoloured and over a prolonged process the bones get brittle'.     Farmer’s wife Bandara, in fact, says that is also why she has had to go  farther to fetch water — the water in their  well has a high fluoride content.    Fernando in Magombo, for her part, complains of brackish water in the  wells in her district.  'That’s puts a tremendous responsibility on the women  in the household to ensure clean drinking water and hygiene,' she says.     Then there is the dumping of solid waste and garbage in rivers, streams,  lakes and waterways.  So is depleting groundwater resources in cities as the  few existing wells are contaminated and polluted due to their close proximity  to septic tanks.     Says Athukorala: 'There is an urgent need to protect wells and recharge  wells in the city — even for other uses like washing and toilets, because pipe- borne water resources would be a problem in the future.  Here, hygiene and  health becomes a more serious issue and that load again is handled by  women. '  