A four-year-old landmark law that was supposed to bring profound changes in  the lives of India’s tribal and forest-dwelling peoples has failed to deliver on  that promise.  According to activists and government officials alike, the Scheduled Tribes  and Other Traditional Forest Dwellers (Recognition of Forest Rights) Act —  better known as the Forest Rights Act (FRA) of 2006 — has remained nothing  more than ink on paper as general confusion, corruption, and an intransigent  forest department complicate the already feeble efforts to implement it.    'Despite being a complicated law, no substantial step is even now underway  to increase ground-level awareness among revenue and forest department  personnel and village-level committees (the base level nodal agency to  process the land claims),' says Tanushree Das of the Bhubaneswar-based  non-government organisation Vasundhara.  'Every level is still floundering. '    'The government’s handling of community or village forest land claims is a  complete failure,' adds Sheikh Sahajahan Bari, who works for the non- government organisation Pragati in tribal-dominated Koraput district.     'The rules governing FRA were notified more than two years back, in  January 2008.  (Yet) the concerned officials themselves still remain unclear on  them,' said Bari, who took part in a March gathering here of some 600  grassroots women leaders and activists from Orissa’s 30 districts to discuss  forest land and rights issues.    Millions of India’s traditional forest dwellers are thus in the same spot that  they have been since colonial times: bereft of any rights on the forest land  that they have lived off for generations.    This is the situation that forest rights act is supposed to change.  For one, it  allows claims to individual family titles to already occupied or cultivated  forest land that are currently considered ‘encroachments’.    For another, the law allows access to, as well as the use and selling of,  forest produce that has been traditionally collected.  This includes particular  leaves that are used as leaf-plates, palm-tree juices, medicinal plants, and  fruits.   The forest rights law also gives a community -- usually one village unit --  the right to manage and protect forests it has customarily managed, even  though these are government property.      Tribal communities constitute over eight percent of the country’s more than  one billion people.  Some eight million of India’s tribal people can be found  here in the forest-rich eastern state Orissa, which has the third largest tribal  population in the country, following Chhattisgarh and Jharkhand.    But even Ashok  Kumar Tripathy, principal secretary of Orissa’s Scheduled  Tribe and Scheduled Caste Development Department -- the highest state- level FRA nodal agency -- recently observed in an internal circular that  although there have been 'repeated clarifications on ensuring the recognition  of Community Forest Rights' under the law, 'very little progress has been  made in different districts so far (in the state)'.    Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribes, also known as ‘dalits’ and ‘adivasis’,  are granted special reservation quotas by the Indian Constitution in  educational institutions and government jobs, in order to uplift their socio- economic status.    For sure, some stipulations in the law make its implementation difficult.  One provision, for example, says that a tribal claimant should have used the  land prior to the 1980s while a non-tribal claimant should have chalked up at  least 75 years.  In most cases, however, the latter is impossible to prove as  members of deprived communities — like those covered by the law — usually  do not live beyond 50 years.  Biswar Kumar Nayak, special secretary in Orissa’s Scheduled Tribe and  Scheduled Caste department, concedes that one of the reasons why more  than two-thirds of the 300,000 ownership applications received as of Mar.  1  were rejected was because the claimants could not prove that they had been  using the forest land for 75 years. Nayak says, however, that while contentious issues remain, the pace of the  implementation of the forest rights act is 'fair'.  As it is, some remote areas remain unsurveyed while in others, land  demarcation is untraceable.  In one area, Maoist rebels burnt down an  administrative building with all land records.  Clashes between neighbouring  villages over contested boundaries and mature plantations are other reasons  delaying land transfer.  Activists themselves say that, too often, mailed applications are simply not  reaching their destination.  But they also note that past and present forest officials are among the most  serious hindrances to the full implementation of the law.  According to the  activists, this may be because the forest rights law gives people a significant  amount of the power once wielded exclusively by the department over  forests. States across India have seen legal petitions filed by retired forest officers  seeking a stay in the implementation of the law.  In Orissa, one such petition —  which argued that communities would destroy forests and wildlife if granted  ownership — was quashed just last year. Bari also echoes other activists in saying that forest officials often do not  extend any help to those wanting to exercise their rights over forest land as  stipulated in the law. For instance, Bari says, a community wanting to lay claim on forest produce  must first provide details such as the curative qualities of the medicinal  plants that they are harvesting, the demarcation of grazing grounds, and the  names and quantity of the products they will be getting from forest flora.   They must also provide a hand map demarcating the claim area. Yet, says Bari, 'after completing this tortuous process, a forest official who is  a mandatory member of the joint verification team often does not turn up'.   Corruption has muddled the process as well.  According to Sebati Behera, who  works in 35 villages the community organisation Adima Adibasi Ekta Manch  (Forum for Primitive Tribe Unity) in Boudh district, low-level government  personnel who visit villages to measure land usually ask 5,000 rupees (110  dollars) in exchange for processing a claim.   Some three months back, recalls Behera, she came across a group  representing nine tribal families as it was paying state personnel some  22,000 rupees (500 dollars) in grease money.  She says she snatched the  money and returned it to the families.   Forest dweller Bidulata Danayak, a mother of four, says she has been asked  for a bribe.  She says that village committee members demanded 5,000  rupees to vouch for her claim on 1. 62 hectares of forest land that she farms.   