Three years after vehicle-makers succeeded in weakening new European Union  (EU) pollution standards for cars, many of the same firms are hoping to frustrate  efforts to make vans more fuel-efficient. Under proposed new rules being discussed in Brussels, new vans on the  market would not be allowed to emit more than 135 grams of heat-trapping  carbon dioxide (CO2) per kilometre (g/km) travelled by 2020.  This would be  68g/km less than the amount of the greenhouse gas an average van on  Europe's roads released in 2007. Theoretically, these measures will reduce the contribution that transport  makes to climate change.  Whereas CO2 emissions from most other economic  sectors are falling in the EU, that from transport rose by 36 percent in the  1990-2007 period.  Vans comprise about 12 percent of the Union's light-duty  vehicles, with their number increasing by 50 percent between 1997 and 2007.  Despite claiming to be committed to reducing its environmental impact, the  vehicle industry has mounted a vigorous campaign against the proposed new  standards.  Sigrid de Vries, spokeswoman for the European Automobile  Manufacturers Association (known by its French acronym ACEA) said that the  2020 target was 'not feasible'. 'It's very easy to portray industry as blocking everything,' she told IPS.   'Industry is not at all opposed to legislation as such.  But there are certain  technical limits to this type of vehicle.  It is easy to say that you can meet them  (the new emission targets), but at what cost?'Green campaigners, though, consider the complaints made by industry as  groundless.  They say that some leading van manufacturers have already  proven their ability to improve fuel efficiency when bringing new models onto  the market.  Volkswagen's latest range of T5 vans, for example, is 10 percent  more sparing in the amount of fuel it burns up than the same vans were in  2007. Transport and Environment (T&E) - a coalition of ecological groups - points  out that vehicle-makers used similar arguments three years ago, when they  convinced EU governments to weaken plans to make cars less polluting.   Technological progress in the interim indicates that the arguments were  misleading, according to T&E.  It points out that two of the best selling cars in  Europe - the Volkswagen Golf and the Ford Focus - are available in 99g/km  models, indicating that there is no major obstacle to prevent firms from  complying with reduction goals for cars over the coming decade.  'The car industry's lobbyists said no to car CO2 standards but the engineers  proved them wrong,' T&E campaigner Kerstin Meyer said.  'They are now  attacking the proposed long-term target for vans - but based on past  performance that claim is not credible. 'Meyer is seeking a more ambitious target for vans - 125g/km - than that  recommended by the European Commission, the EU's executive arm.  She  argued that poor fuel efficiency is an unnecessary drain on the finances of  businesses and that measures to cut pollution make sound economic sense.   'Business spends 30 billion euros (41 billion dollars) every year on fuel for  vans,' she said.  'That's money going up in smoke that could be invested in  training, technology and innovation. 'Originally proposed by the Commission in October last year, the proposed  new standards for vans were discussed by the EU's environment ministers  Mar.  15.  During that debate several governments sought alterations to the  Commission's plan to begin phasing in the emission cuts within the next few  years.  Under the step-by-step plan, vans would have to meet a 175 g/km  target in 2016 and then reduce it further to 135g/km in 2020.  Yet 75 percent  of the 2016 goal would have to be met just four years from now.  Italy, Germany, Britain and Poland are pushing for the reduction timetable to  begin at a later date than that wanted by the Commission.  These  governments - representing some of the EU's largest states - suggest that  the plan would be too onerous for van-makers if implemented in its current  form.  Several EU governments also want an agreement that the feasibility of  the 2020 goal will be subject to a formal assessment process in 2013. Connie Hedegaard, the EU commissioner for policies related to climate  change, argued nonetheless that the original blueprint was realistic.  She cited  estimates that each van owner would enjoy a saving of 2,000 euro over the  lifetime of his or her vehicle. Greenpeace campaigner Franziska Achterberg said: 'Shielding the European  car sector from ambitious climate standards will only hinder innovation and  cuddle them to death.  After years of inaction, the motor industry is finally  showing signs of movement on fuel efficiency.  The EU needs to set high  standards, not to waste this momentum. ' 