A high-level meeting in London of political and business leaders will consider  this week ways of raising 100 billion dollars to fight climate change.  And yet  another one in Washington will search for ways of finding, and funding, more  three-dollar stoves around the world. The second one is more ambitious than it sounds; it aims to get more than  half a billion clean stoves around the world.  But working with the little and  the tangible, it might just be more effective than the London meet.  And, it  brings simultaneous health benefits. The Britain-based Ashden Awards for Sustainable Energy is pushing strongly  for cleaner stoves around the world.  'Fighting climate change and improving  the health of the world's poorest people are often seen as competing  priorities,' says a report from the Ashden Awards.  'Yet some technologies  address both tasks at the same time. ' For example, the cooking stove. 'Almost half the world's households, some three billion, eat food cooked on  fires and stoves burning wood, dung, coal, straw, husks and charcoal,' says  the report released in London Sunday evening.  'Pollution levels from smoke  and gases such as carbon monoxide are typically hundreds of times those  that would be tolerated in the streets or a factory. 'An estimated 1. 6 million people die annually as a result, including around a  million children under five, mostly victims of childhood pneumonia. 'Getting half a billion stoves to these households will begin to address the  problem substantially.  But that's a lot of stoves, and it's not clear how these  households will get them. 'That's the big question which the United Nations Foundation/Shell  Foundation meeting in Washington DC will be looking at next week, so we  may have some detailed strategies after that,' Dr Anne Wheldon, technical  director of the Ashden Awards, tells IPS in an interview. The clean stoves certainly exist, and at that price.  'For instance, in Cambodia  traditional stove-makers have been trained to produce an improved version  which sells for only three dollars,' says Wheldon. 'We are also starting to see the factory-scale production that can make cheap  stoves available more readily on a global basis.  A very basic stove produced  by the Shengzhou Stove Manufacturer has an ex-factory price of 3. 50 dollars,  with other models at eight to 12 dollars.  Envirofit has also started mass  manufacture, with some higher price range models with more features to  them. 'Success on scale has been achieved in China.  An estimated 180 million  improved stoves were introduced from 1983 to 1995, and cook for most of  the population, the Ashden report says.  China has recently renewed efforts to  provide a new generation of yet more efficient stoves. But scaling up is now feasible elsewhere too, says Wheldon.  'Provided that a  stove is developed that people really like to use, it is quite feasible to get to  the 100,000s scale, and there are a range of ways of doing this that work well  in different circumstances - for instance, a government-led programme in  Eritrea, an NGO-led programme in Bangladesh, upgrading of existing  commercial production in Cambodia.  Such programmes could probably grow  to the 1-10 million scale. 'The Ashden calculations suggest that a global programme to manufacture  the half-billion improved stoves needed to convert the world's poor to safer  cooking could save hundreds of thousands of young lives a year - and at the  same time cut global greenhouse gas emissions by the equivalent of up to  one billion tonnes of CO2 a year. 'Such investments ought to attract large sums through the carbon market,'  the report says.  'We calculate that improved cooking stoves can keep a tonne  of CO2 out of the atmosphere for as little as one to three dollars - an  exceedingly good deal in a market where offsets can be sold for 20-30  dollars a tonne. 'The carbon market could fund cleaner stoves in a number of ways, says  Wheldon, such as 'directly subsidising a government or NGO programme that  provides stoves at low cost or sometimes zero cost as with the Eritrea stove  programme, directly subsidising commercial sales, or supporting an umbrella  organisation that coordinates independent producers, and takes  responsibility for quality control and monitoring, as with the Cambodia stove  programme coordination. 'Since 2001, 18 stove projects in Africa, Asia and Latin America have won  Ashden awards, most of which have gone on to expand and develop, the  Ashden report says.  Time now, it says, for a scaling up of these successes.   