Environment groups have warned that Eastern Europe is plagued with serious  and potentially dangerous waste disposal problems as new figures reveal the  region has Europe's lowest recycling rates. They say that poor legislation, insufficient infrastructure, lack of  environmental awareness outside cities and a shortage of political will to  tackle waste management problems has led to serious problems with illegal  rubbish dumping.  Together with non-existent recycling in some countries,  this poses a threat to human health and the environment, they say.  'In rural areas illegal dumping is a serious problem,' Lucian Ionescu, director  of the Bucharest branch of the non-profit organisation the Regional  Environmental Centre for Central and Eastern Europe (REC), told IPS.  'People  are not aware of recycling and waste management - something which dates  back to communist times.  Illegal dumping poses serious health and  environmental risks, while burying certain types of waste in landfill sites has  its risks too. 'Figures released by the EU's statistical agency Eurostat this month showed  that Eastern European EU member states lag far behind their Western  counterparts on waste management. While the average EU recycling rate in 2008 for municipal waste was 21  percent, Bulgaria did not recycle any waste at all, Romania just one per cent,  the Czech Republic two percent and Lithuania and Slovakia only three  percent.  In Estonia the rate of recycling decreased by 10 percent on 2007,  while landfill increased by 11 percent.  In Latvia there was a seven percent fall  for recycling and a seven percent rise in landfill use. In comparison, in Austria 69 percent of municipal waste produced in the  country was either recycled or made into compost - up 10 percent on the  previous year - while Luxembourg also increased its recycling by 17 percent. Meanwhile, the EU average for the share of waste that ends up in landfill sites  was 40 percent.  But in Bulgaria the rate was 100 percent and in Romania 99  percent. Environmental groups say poorly equipped older sites pose land and  groundwater contamination threats, and there are health and environment  hazards connected to gas emissions from decaying organic waste at landfill  sites. In Bulgaria, residents near the controversial Suhodol landfill site in Sofia have  previously picketed the site in a bid to get it closed down over safety fears.   Apart from the smell which they said made it impossible to live close to the  site, they claimed there was a serious risk from explosive methane gas -  which is also a potent greenhouse gas - at the site as it was released from  rotting waste. The Bulgarian government has recently launched a tender for a new high- tech 117 million euros waste disposal plant just outside Sofia to be  completed by 2012.  But environmental groups say that governments in the  region are not doing anywhere near enough to facilitate and encourage  proper waste management. Ivo Kropacek, director at Friends of the Earth in the Czech Republic, told IPS:  'Legislation in Eastern European countries on waste management is poor.  For  instance, there is a lack of legislation on producer responsibility.  Producers of  waste, such as firms, need to be forced by legislation to take steps to help  manage their waste sustainably, such as using recyclable materials.  'One of the reasons for such low recycling rates in the Czech Republic is that  there is little or no separation of bio-waste, that is, kitchen and garden  organic waste from other municipal waste.  In the West there is more  separation and this is why the recycling rates are higher.  The government  must do more to ensure mandatory separation, and more campaigns are  needed to encourage awareness of recycling and what can be done at a  household level, such as home composting. 'Facilities for waste collection and subsequent recycling are also hampered by  a lack of finance in some parts of the region, particularly rural areas.   Financing for recycling is also a problem for some municipalities. The CEPTA civic association in Slovakia which promotes sustainable  ecological practices claims that some municipalities are actually losing money  on recycling collections and councils and residents have become 'de- motivated and disgusted' about a service which CEPTA says costs more than  four times as much as non-separated waste collection.  They add that central government subsidies must be introduced to encourage  local authorities to continue and improve recycling schemes and waste  separation. National governments have introduced various environmental laws and, as EU  members, Eastern European states are bound to meet standards set out by  Brussels on waste management. The European Commission is keen to increase recycling.  But some states are  a long way behind on meeting legal norms, such as EU-wide standards for  landfill sites and waste management systems, and both Bulgaria and Slovakia  are facing legal action from the European Commission over their failings.  'Eastern European governments argue that they must let economies grow and  that they cannot just pass laws which might potentially slow that growth.  But  economies can be grown in a green way, without having to harm the  environment.  We need politicians to give us better laws,' Kropacek told IPS.   