While agricultural research has made massive strides over the years in helping  the world produce more food from the same amount of land, around one in six  people, the 1. 02 billion hungry, have not noticed. The populations of wealthier countries have abundant cheap food thanks to  researchers' efforts and, no doubt, many more people in the developing  world would be undernourished if states such as India, Mexico and the  Philippines had not imported modern farming practices and technologies.  These advances have not done enough, though, to help the rural poor, who  account for three-quarters of the world's hungry, to feed themselves or  escape from poverty. 'Poor people don't have a voice and rural people don't have a voice, urban  tends to dominate and yet all of our food comes from rural areas,' said Noel  Magor of the International Rice Research Institute (IRRI), one of the  participants at this week's Global Conference on Agricultural Research for  Development (GCARD) in Montpellier, France. 'Often it is considered that technology will magically make its way through to  poor households and that doesn't happen.  Poorer households actually get  ignored by the system and so they fall by the wayside. 'Research failings are only part of the reason why so many people have empty  stomachs in a world of adequate aggregate food supplies, along with a series  of social, gender, justice, dissemination and economic issues and long- running underinvestment in agriculture as a whole. Nevertheless, a part of the problem they are and the obvious solution, is to  turn agricultural research 'bottom-up', based on the real needs of  smallholder farmers, rather than trying to make solutions developed for other  demands work for them. This is necessary for more than the two billion people whose livelihoods  depend on the world's 500 million smallholder farms, according to the United  Nations International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD).  The U. N.   Food and Agriculture Organisation (FAO) forecasts that world food production  must increase 70 percent by 2050 to nourish a human population likely to  reach 9. 1 billion. But many experts believe expansion of large-scale farming, which relies  heavily on chemicals and irrigation and often entails deforestation for  livestock rearing, cannot achieve this target sustainably, given the high toll it  has on soil fertility and the environment in general, and the increasing  pressure climate change is putting on water resources. So there is growing consensus, even among organisations such as the G8 and  the World Bank, that it is necessary to help the developing world's  smallholder farmers become more productive so they can grow themselves  out of poverty, feed their families and contribute to meeting soaring food  demand at the same time. 'The developing world's agricultural research systems are currently  insufficiently developmental-oriented,' says an expert paper laying the  foundations for a roadmap that will be approved at GCARD on how  agricultural research should be transformed.  'Research organisations have generally not been good at integrating the  needs and priorities of the poor in the work of researchers,' the paper says.   'Agricultural research and development efforts that engage farmers and build  from the bottom up can release locked-up innovation, become responsive  and effective, encourage many different pathways, and result in adequate  food for all. 'Smallholders need research to provide them with innovations - new farming  and livestock breeding techniques and seeds - that are not only effective in  increasing yields in a scenario made more difficult by climate change, but are  also affordable, and appropriate to their skills and equipment. Smallholders are often remarkably quick at changing their practices to adapt  them to changing situations on the ground, such as rainfall patterns, and so  feedback from them can be excellent input to shape scientific studies. 'Agricultural research plans need to allow for a genuine two-way flow of  knowledge and information, between the scientists and the rural  communities, including indigenous peoples, to ensure that our response to  the needs and conditions in rural areas is truly comprehensive,' said Nwanze. Good agricultural research should also be increasingly interdisciplinary.  Rural  insurance and credit innovations are needed, for example, to encourage poor  farmers, who are frequently reluctant to take loans for fear of not being able  to repay in the event of bad weather or crop price changes, to invest in new  resources. Greater use should also be made of mobile telephones which, among other  things, can deliver smallholders with up-to-date information on weather,  crops, pest control and markets for them to make better-informed decisions.  'We're looking at how to make knowledge more relevant to the needs of the  poor,' FAO's Mark Holderness, who is also executive secretary of the Global  Forum on Agricultural Research, told IPS.  'There's no silver bullet here.  We are looking for a much greater integration  of disciplines, much greater collective action that does not just deal with the  (agricultural) input, but also deals with all the pieces needed to get that  knowledge to farmers, to get farmers' produce through to market, to create a  more viable livelihood for farmers. 'This is where the public sector is being asked to take the lead.  'The private  sector will invest in agriculture but only where it sees a profit, which is  logical, but it means that it has a strong bias to the richest farmers and will  not do much about poverty alleviation,' Emile Frison, Director General of the  Rome-based Bioversity International research institute devoted to agricultural  biodiversity, told IPS.  