Non-governmental organisations (NGOs) are guilty of judging a palm oil project  in Uganda on innuendo rather than its merits, the United Nations poverty agency  supporting the controversial scheme said, as the project starts to bear fruit for  smallholder farmers. Local civil society groups, however, are standing by a report they  commissioned last year accusing a private-public partnership on Uganda's  Bugala Island on Lake Victoria of a series of environmental and social  misdemeanours. The palm oil industry has long been under fire for, among other things, its  contribution to deforestation and the destruction of endangered animals'  habitats in Asia. The U. N.  International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD) says this is  behind what it considers an unfounded wave of hostility that the project it  helped launch with a 10 million dollar loan has met since the first plantations  were set up in 2003. 'There's been a knee-jerk reaction to the word 'oil palm' because of the  industry's poor reputation in the 1990s,' Marian Bradley, IFAD country  programme manager for Uganda told IPS.  'There's been an inability of the  NGO community to acknowledge the efforts the industry has made in terms  of cleaning up what it's been doing. 'By innuendo this has been applied to Uganda.  If a company in Malaysia is  damaging a habitat of orangutans, the oil palm industry must be damaging a  habitat in Uganda. 'The Kalangala NGO Forum (KADINGO) of local environmental and civil society  groups disagrees.  'The study was based on what was on the ground at that time and nothing  much has changed,' David Mwayafu, programme officer with the Uganda  Coalition For Sustainable Development and one of the report's authors, told  IPS. Bradley accepted there was some truth in KADINGO's charges in that the  obligation to respect a 200-metre border of forest along the lake shore has  always not been upheld.  The border is needed to prevent soil erosion, and act  as a buffer zone to stop fertilisers used on the oil palms from running off  into the lake and distorting its eco-system. But she said the problem concerned less than two percent of the project's  area and that remedial action had been taken. 'The 200-metre border is being maintained and, in places where it had been  destroyed or did not exist, the private sector has had nurseries of indigenous  trees and is replanting it,' she said.  IFAD says allegations the project has  eaten into protected lands are simply untrue. KADINGO counters that the government had no right to include land  allocated to the Uganda Land Alliance, a consortium of NGOs, in territory it  handed over to the Oil Palm Uganda Limited (OPUL) private consortium in  exchange for a 10 percent share in the Bugala plantation. The NGOs are also unhappy that forest land was cleared to make way for the  plantations.  IFAD says this 'mostly secondary' woodland accounted for under 40 percent  of the total area.  'We're not talking about habitat for charismatic wildlife,' Bradley said, adding  that critics had failed to give proper weight to the project's benefits.  Uganda,  she said, needs to expand vegetable oil production to reduce its reliance on  expensive imports so it can improve levels of nutrition by providing the oil at  affordable prices for poor people. 'The amount of fats in diets remains very low, at 4. 3 kilos per capita per year  compared to a minimum estimated requirement of about 7. 5 kilos,' said  Bradley.  'There are a lot of people in Uganda who are not getting enough  calories in their diets. 'The project has brought new roads (mostly to palm oil sites), new health  services (for palm oil workers) and a regular ferry service to the island which  Bradley said has helped boost tourism.  It has, she said, created thousands of jobs too, including the people  employed at a mill on the island and at a refinery at nearby Jinja, although  KADINGO says pay and conditions are poor. '(Plantation) workers houses are small and in some places workers sleep in  makeshift plastic shelters,' said Mwayafu.  'The services provided are  unevenly distributed. 'IFAD wants the scheme to give smallholder farmers the opportunity to  capitalise on surging demand for vegetable oil, detergents and soaps from  palm.  It said over 700 smallholders have developed about 2,000 hectares of  plantations and 1,500 more will be added over the next few years, compared  to 6,000 hectares developed by OPUL. The Kalangala Oil Palm Growers Trust (KOPGT), the association through which  IFAD provides financial and technical support and the training smallholders  need to cultivate oil palms, which take about five years to mature before  becoming productive, says the project is gradually winning over locals. 'At first there was animosity,' KOPGT manager Nelson Basaalide told IPS.  'In  February 52 of the farmers who first joined started selling their fruit, and they  are very excited.  This has brought others to say it's time to join and we've had  lots of people coming forward to register in recent months. 'KADINGO says some smallholders have gripes about the strings attached,  such as the inability to shop around for fertilisers and other inputs. But not all of them are dissatisfied: 'I'm very happy,' Samuel Ssonko told IPS.   'The only problem we had were delays in getting credits but this has been  solved.  We didn't have anything here before.  There have been lots of  improvements.  I want people to come here and see.  Ordinary people are  planting.  It's a good project. '  