Eastern Europe's organic food industry is mushrooming as it brushes off the  effects of the global recession, and more consumers in the region turn to  healthier foods. Some countries now have twice as much agricultural land turned over to  organic farming as those in Western Europe, and experts are predicting a  bright future for the industry in the former communist bloc. Christof Arndt, project coordinator at the Dresden-based EkoConnect non- profit group promoting organic agriculture in Eastern Europe, told IPS: 'The  last few years have seen a huge rise in organic farming, food production and  consumption in Eastern Europe, and the market is developing really quickly -  despite the recession. 'In Eastern Europe under communism, almost all farming was collectivised  and controlled by the state.  When the regimes fell, some farmers began  offering organic products.  These were initially seen as a curiosity by many  consumers, and organic food became available in the mass market only  slowly. But in the last decade many more farms and outlets have been established,  and consumption of organic foods has risen sharply. The Czech Agriculture Ministry said last month that almost 10 percent of  agricultural land in the country is now given over to organic farming - twice  as much as in Germany, according to EkoConnect.  The number of Czech  organic farms at the end of 2009 grew to 2,700 - a 50 percent jump on  2008.  Consumption of organic goods rose 40 percent year on year in 2008 to  1. 8 billion Czech crowns (69 million euros). In Bulgaria the amount of farmland used for organic farming has risen 27- fold between 2002 and 2007, according to the country's agriculture ministry.   In Poland there were 14,900 organic farms registered in 2008 - up from just  300 in 1996. According to figures from the European Union's statistical agency Eurostat,  between 2007 and 2008 the second, third and fourth highest increases in the  total amount of land used for organic farming in the EU were recorded in  Bulgaria (+ 22 percent), Slovakia (+ 19 percent), and Hungary (+ 15 percent).   In the period between 2005 and 2008, the highest increases were found in  Poland (+ 94 percent), and Lithuania (+ 89 percent). Industry monitors in individual countries have also reported large rises in  organic food consumption across the Eastern European region in recent  years. In Poland, the Symbio organic food producer claimed sales of organic food  rose by 300 percent in 12 months between 2007 and 2008.  In the Czech  Republic, organic food consumption rose by 70 percent year on year in 2007,  according to EkoConnect. Experts say that the rise in organic farm numbers and production and  consumption of organic food has been driven by subsidies introduced by  governments over the last decade combined with people becoming more  informed about organic food and changing their diets. Dysfunctional communist-planned food production and farming contributed  to national diets in the region being based around meat-laden and fatty  meals with few vegetables, and designed to be filling instead of healthy.   When communism fell diets improved only slowly as eating habits changed.   But with the spread of information on the benefits of healthy eating, younger  generations are now keen to try organic foods. 'Consumers today are very informed about organic foods and want to make  sure of what they are feeding themselves,' Karolina Dytrtova, project manager  at the Bio Institut organic food industry research and education institute in  Olomouc in the Czech Republic, told IPS. The organic food industry in the region as a whole remains small compared  to the West, though.  According to the London-based Organic Monitor  industry monitoring group, in 2007, while organic food and beverage sales in  the whole of Europe stood at 20 billion euros, Eastern Europe accounted for  just 60 million euros of that. Experts say the relative cost of organic foods is stifling consumption in a  region with some of the lowest wages in the entire EU.  In Slovakia, for  instance, where the average monthly wage is 800 euros, organic chicken meat  costs as much as 10 euros per kilo in shops.  Non-organically farmed chicken  costs around 2. 50 euros. In the Czech Republic, surveys cited in local media have reported the  difference in prices of organic and non-organic foodstuffs is as much as 140  percent for some products.  In Poland it is up to almost 300 percent for  organic dairy products, and in Romania, where the average monthly wage is  just over 350 euros, organic produce can cost consumers almost twice as  much as industrially produced similar products, according to local media. Industry experts say high prices are partly down to a lack of facilities to  process finished products, meaning that many Eastern European producers  end up exporting large amounts of raw materials to Western Europe for  processing.  Much of that is then sold in Western Europe as finished products  such as packs of biscuits or dairy products, but some is sent back again to  Eastern Europe for sale - a costly and, some argue, relatively environmentally  unfriendly process. The rate of growth in consumption of organic products has fallen during the  global recession.  In the Czech Republic, growth in organic food consumption  had been 70 percent year on year in 2007, but dropped to 40 percent in  2008, and experts have estimated it will be as little as five percent in 2009. But environmental groups maintain the tail-off is relatively small and only  temporary.  Vojtech Kotecky of Friends of the Earth in the Czech Republic told  local media: 'There will be a return to fast growth once the recession is over. '  