The immense diversity of peoples was apparent at the World Social Forum (WSF),  which ended Sunday in Belém, the capital of the state of Pará in the Brazilian  Amazon region.  The presence of 1,900 indigenous people representing 190 ethnic groups as  well as 1,400 Quilombolas (people of African origins living in traditional  communities) was conspicuous among the 133,000 participants from 142  countries.  They had their own tents, discussions and celebrations at the  event. For the first time, there was also a tent for the Collective Rights of Stateless  Peoples, initiating a reflection at the WSF about a 'radical democracy' that  upholds the self-determination of peoples, said Arnau Flores, a Catalonian  journalist responsible for communication at the Escarré International Centre  for Ethnic Minorities and Nations (CIEMEN). A map showing 32 of these peoples-without-states was displayed in the  tent, but 'there are many more,' Flores told IPS.  Some are well-known - like  the Palestinians, Basques, Roma, Kurds, Tibetans and Saharawi.  Others are  seldom thought of in this context, like the South American Mapuche and the  Australian Aborigines. More than 20 organisations of such peoples took part in the activities  organised by CIEMEN, with discussions ranging from strategies for  emancipation and building their own institutions, to topical questions linked  to the main themes of the WSF - such as the crisis of civilisation and  globalisation. The seeds of a global network of 'stateless peoples' claiming their collective  rights were sown at this WSF, aiming at a new kind of decolonisation and  running counter to the 'idea of the imperialist nation-state' as the only  institution possible in the world, said Quim Arrufat, a Catalonian political  scientist in charge of CIEMEN's international relations. The Centre is based in Barcelona, the capital of the Spanish region of  Catalonia - a nation-without-a-state. CIEMEN does not itself advocate, for instance, a Palestinian state - the issue  at the centre of the bloody conflict with Israel - but the right of the  Palestinian people to make their own decision about this concern, Arrufat told  IPS, making a careful distinction. The 'plurinational state' established in the new constitutions of Bolivia and  Ecuador is one way forward, but 'perhaps it is not the path for other' peoples  who need, for example, to return to their homeland, like the Saharawi, he  said. At the root of the problem is the 'single legal framework' exported by Europe  to the whole world, which determines the constitution of even international  institutions like the United Nations - made up exclusively of nation states -  which 'is neither representative nor logical,' he claimed. One of the consequences of the nation-state model is wars and conflicts, but  the issue of peoples-without-states is a new one.  Twenty years ago it was a  'prohibited' subject, and changing the present system 'is not at all easy,'  Arrufat said. The WSF opened the way to bringing together organisations from different  regions to debate the issue and promote an international movement for the  'collective rights of peoples' who have had their own identities suppressed,  he said. The legal system of national states does not recognise these collective rights,  focusing instead on the rights of individuals, Flores said. Spain grants a certain amount of autonomy to its regions, but Catalonia  cannot carry out its own referendums, which must be exclusively national,  and in the Basque Country - another Spanish region - any independent party  is 'outlawed and accused of being terrorist,' he said. Paradoxically, Europe, the cradle of the nation-state, is experiencing a  number of conflicts and tensions because of its many 'stateless peoples': the  various Spanish regions, Corsica (in Italy), Brittany (in France), and Scotland  and Wales (in the United Kingdom). The European Union sparked hopes among marginalised peoples that  integration would open the doors to their collective rights, but these hopes  were dashed.  The bloc of 27 countries was built on the idea of statehood,  preventing the acceptance of, for example, multilingualism. Thus the language spoken by seven million Catalonians is official neither in  Spain nor in the EU, while in contrast Maltese - an official language of the  Mediterranean island state of Malta with a population of 400,000 - is  recognised. The assembly on collective rights decided 'to potentiate its participation in  the WSF' by promoting this issue which had previously been considered  almost solely in relation to indigenous groups, Flores said.  Self- determination and sovereignty, among the goals of the 2009 Forum, were the  core themes of the discussion. The diversity of groups with identities of their own was highly visible at the  Social Cartography by Traditional Peoples and Communities tent in Belém.   This project begun by the Federal University of Amazonas (UFAM) and the  Association of Amazonian Universities (UNAMAZ) has expanded throughout  Brazil. Dozens of maps of their territories have been made by indigenous peoples  and the residents of 'quilombos' (communities that were refuges for escaped  African slaves) themselves, as well as by communities and social movements.   These serve to increase knowledge and awareness of their own reality, and to  appropriate information to use as the basis of autonomous initiatives and  public policies. These studies highlight an amazing diversity of communities with their own  lifestyles, customs and methods of organisation, including riverside dwellers  in the Amazon, fisher folk on large rivers, and the different communities who  extract forest products, like natural rubber tappers. Another example are the 'faxinais', peasants in the south of Brazil who pool  their land for livestock raising purposes only and have their own techniques  of environmental management. The diversity of WSF participants at Belém was visible too at the Federal Rural  University of Amazonia (UFRA), where the Youth Camp and members of social  movements were accommodated. The multitudes of people on this campus for the six days of the Forum were  visibly poorer than those who attended the non-governmental organisations'  activities at the nearby Federal University of Pará (UFPA). The large numbers of indigenous Amazon peoples who attended, at a time  when neoliberal (free market) globalisation is in crisis, provided 'new  inspiration for renewing the search for another world,' said Cándido  Grzybowski, one of the founders and organisers of the WSF and head of the  Brazilian Institute of Social and Economic Analyses (IBASE). According to the figures he quoted at a press conference at the conclusion of  the Forum, out of the 133,000 participants in Belém, 15,000 people were at  the Youth Camp and 3,000 were children or teenagers.  This is a guarantee of  the continuity of the WSF, he said. In all, 'nearly 150,000 people were involved' in the global meeting of civil  society, including 4,500 accredited members of the media -2,000 of whom  were journalists, 1,000 artists who put on cultural performances, and over  10,000 people who worked in organisation, cooking food and other services. Security was provided by 7,000 police officers, and health care by 900  professionals, according to Ana Claudia Cardoso, a representative of the state  government of Pará. The next WSF, to be held in 2011, will take place in Africa, said Taoufik Ben  Abdallah, a Senegalese member of the African Social Forum.  But this has not  yet been officially agreed by the WSF International Council, which will  consider the question on Monday and Tuesday. There are proposals for the next WSF to be held in the United States, and for  the biennial character of the Forum to be waived by holding another world  meeting in 2010, in order to analyse and respond to the new circumstances  created by the global financial crisis. 