Lost in the deluge of accusations that China’s dams are the culprit in the  Mekong River’s unusually low levels is the fact that Beijing has actually become  much less tightlipped about thorny issues with its neighbours than in the past. Some years ago, China would have been unlikely to discuss such matters at a  multilateral, official forum where it would be found fault with.    There was a time in the mid-nineties when just about the only response  South-east Asian nations could get from China about the high-profile  dispute at that time — the spat over the Spratly islands in the South China Sea  — was a statement saying it wanted only bilateral fora to discuss it.    Those days are far different from China’s current diplomatic offensive in  South-east Asia, as downstream Mekong communities angrily blame it for  pushing the river to record low levels and exacerbating the worst drought  they have seen in decades.    The sight of dry, cracked earth and sandy stretches of riverbed is now  common in north-east Thailand and Laos down to the Mekong Delta in  Vietnam.  China’s south-west Yunnan province, where its Mekong dams are  located, is itself hurting from the drought.    'It is as if the river has gone mad,' said Niwat Roykaew of the Chiang Khong  Conservation Group in northern Thailand.    The resentment against China for the Mekong’s low levels rivals the anger  that peaked in 2008, when downstream countries blamed it for record-high  floods.    Indeed, the Mekong’s erratic behaviour is an emotional issue for the 65  million people who depend on it for survival.  It is also a major public  relations headache for China, which has a ‘good neighbour’ policy toward the  countries it shares the Mekong with.    Seeing that the issue will not go away, China sent Vice Foreign Minister  Song Tao to attend the two-day Mekong summit that ended in Hua Hin,  Thailand on Apr.  5, one where the drought and China’s dams took the  limelight.    China is not even a full member of the Mekong River Commission (MRC),  which groups the downstream countries of Thailand, Laos, Cambodia and  Vietnam.  As an upstream country like Burma, China is an observer.     Song told the prime ministers of the Mekong countries that China’s three  dams in the upper reaches of the river, which it calls Lancang, and a fourth  that is in the reservoir-filling stage, were not bringing water to a trickle  downstream.    He repeated Chinese officials’ statements that China is responsible for just  13. 5 percent of the Mekong’s volume downstream and cannot possibly cause  the impact being attributed to its dam projects.  It is the drought that is  drying up the Mekong, he said.     'Quite the contrary, by way of the regulating effect of the water dams,  hydropower development of the Lancang River can improve navigation  conditions and help with flood prevention, drought relief and farmland  irrigation of the lower reaches,' Song said.    His words echo what Chinese Assistant Foreign Minister Hu Zhengyue said  when he visited Thailand in March: 'China would not do anything to damage  mutual interest with neighbouring countries in the Mekong. '   Yao Wen, first secretary at the Chinese embassy here, told a Mekong forum  just before the Hua Hin summit that a few weeks ago, China released 5  million cubic metres of water from its dams to help ease the drought’s  effects.    MRC Chief Executive Officer Jeremy Bird told the same forum: 'We can’t say  that the severe drought from this year is from dams in China. ' MRC data  show that there is decreased rainfall in the lower Mekong region — the last  rainy season ended earlier than usual — as well as the lowest tributary flows in  50 years, Bird explains.     In March too, China said it would share 'until the end of the drought' data  on water movement from the Manwan and Jinghong dams in Yunnan.  Until  the downstream protests peaked, China only shared data about water  releases in the flood season.     While Bird called this 'very positive' news, critics say that what China should  share is hydrological information from before Manwan, the first Lancang  dam, was completed in 1995 in order to study changes in water levels.     They add that more than data about Manwan and Jinghong, what is key is  how China is filling the Xiaowan dam, which is the most upstream of the  Lancang dams and where most of the water would presumably be stored.       Set to be the world’s highest dam at 300 metres when it starts operation in  2012, critics suspect it plays a role in the Mekong’s low levels.  Chinese  officials have said they are filling the reservoir only during the wet season.       'But it isn’t rocket science to realise that those latter two stations (Manwan  and Jinghong) alone provide essentially zero information as to how much  water is presently being retained much further upstream to fill the new  Xiaowan reservoir,' Alan Potkin of the Centre for South-east Asian Studies at  Northern Illinois University said in a published commentary.    China’s difficulty in getting heard reflects a problem of trust, but it wants to  avoid major damage to its ties with South-east Asian nations.  After all, these  countries, which used to see China as a threat, now view it as a friendly  power.   'Perhaps this is the price of being a superpower, to have all your actions  analysed and criticised,' remarked a Chinese journalist.     Witoon Permpongsacharoen of the Mekong Energy and Ecology Network  concedes that the Chinese seem more willing to engage these days, but says  much remains to be seen.  Chinese activists, he said, say that China works in  different ways and that 'it moves very slowly, but when it moves, it moves'.     But this matters little to those who are nervously watching the Mekong  River they thought they knew.    'We cannot rely on governments, national and international organisations,  high-level authorities, and all big bureaucrats to solve this Mekong crisis any  more,' Niwat argued.  'It is enough!' 