When villagers in Kandal province near the Cambodian capital blocked National  Road 2 in early April, it was just the latest protest by rural villagers angered by  yet another alleged land grab.    They had blocked the road in a bid to raise awareness about the loss of  hundreds of hectares of their land to a private developer, whose bulldozers  had started clearing the land in late March.    Ten of the villagers were arrested, the latest in a seemingly unending string  of land evictions that have engulfed this South-east Asian country in recent  years.    The problem is likely to get even worse, critics say, because the  government’s moves to allocate vast tracts of land to foreign and local  companies are often done without consulting locals.    Another huge deal was touted earlier this year when Australia’s former  finance minister, Peter Costello — also a paid adviser to the World Bank on  transparency and good governance — announced a 600 million U. S.  dollar  investment in agriculture here.    This deal would be four times larger by value than any single agricultural  investment in Cambodia.    The size of the land in question is substantial too: Costello, managing  director of BKK Partners Ltd, a corporate advisory firm based in Sydney, spoke  of more than 100,000 hectares.     The reason for the proposed investment by Costello’s client and others is  simple enough: Rising food prices in 2008 alerted investors to the returns  they can make from buying or leasing tracts of land in poor countries that  have plenty of water and fertile land.    Cambodia certainly needs foreign investment and it needs the 150,000 jobs  that Costello reportedly told Deputy Prime Minister Sok An would be created  in the agriculture project.    'We have seen a spike in food prices in 2008, so I think agriculture is going  to come back into its own as an investment in the decades that lie ahead and  of course that's a great opportunity for Cambodia,' Costello told the ‘Phnom  Penh Post’ newspaper in an interview.    In recent years, Cambodia has done land deals with several countries.   China, Vietnam, South Korea, Kuwait and Qatar have signed up to invest in  agriculture — be that to grow food for export or crops such as rubber.    But critics say transparency is absent from the process.  What has been  agreed commercially in dozens of deals in every investment sector is  regarded by Phnom Penh as confidential, despite the fact that the  government is often selling or leasing public assets.    Son Chhay, an outspoken opposition MP and former head of Parliament’s  foreign affairs committee, said that that in Parliament he was regularly  prevented by his deputy, who was from the ruling Cambodian People's Party,  from getting information on deals signed by the government with foreign  nations.    Secrecy, said Son Chhay, has long been part of the often-murky process of  investment here.    'It’s still the case that we are not able to get our hands (on investment  documents) and that’s a cause for great concern,' he said.  'A lot of  concessions have caused problems to our farmers and indigenous people  who have no knowledge of what is in the contracts. '   But he said Costello stressed the importance of transparency and the  negative effects of corruption during his visit.   'He should act upon his word.   We would hope that this kind of investment from a society like Australia  would be done in a proper manner,' Son Chhay said.  'I would very much like  that this BKK company provides the contract to the public so I can have a  copy of that. '   Land in Cambodia is a complicated topic, not least because of the Khmer  Rouge rule in the 1970s, when private property was abolished and land  documents destroyed.  In recent years around 1. 1 million land title documents  have been awarded, but that is less than 10 percent of the total land parcels,  says the World Bank, which was involved in the scheme.    Combine a lack of title with the fact that around 80 percent of the 14  million Cambodians live in rural areas, and around 40 percent of them live  under the poverty line, and the rising landlessness problem has many worried  about social instability.    In 2007, the Cambodian office of the U. N.  human rights body released a  report on economic land concessions (ELCs).  It noted that 59 concessions for  nearly 950,000 hectares of rural land had been granted to private companies  to develop agro-industrial plantations.    The true figure, it pointed out, is certainly higher since the statistics  excluded smaller ELCs.  The U. N.  body said that the concessions had  'adversely affected the human rights and livelihoods of Cambodia’s rural  communities'.    Since that report’s release, the government’s investment approval arm, the  Council for the Development of Cambodia, has signed off a further 33  projects worth 837 million dollars in the agro-industry sector — and that  excludes the proposed Costello deal.  Many of these are plantations.    The government recently passed controversial legislation that allows it to  expropriate land for projects deemed to be in the public interest.  Agricultural  investments certainly fall into that category, as Prime Minister Hun Sen made  clear earlier this year.    Speaking at the January unveiling of a new 100 million-dollar Thai sugar  mill part-owned by a leading light in the ruling party, Hun Sen said that the  extra workers and land needed to expand its sugar production would be  found for Thailand’s Khon Kaen Sugar Industry company, which already has a  90-year concession for 20,000 hectares, since its operations were in the  national interest.  