Collapsed buildings, homes turned to rubble, students killed or trapped in the  wreckage of schools and dormitories — last week’s 7. 1-magnitude earthquake in  western China’s remote Qinghai province offered chilling reminders of the  Sichuan earthquake that killed almost 90,000 people in 2008.    In Qinghai, where the death toll from the Apr.  14 quake has surpassed  1,700 with hundreds still unaccounted for, a far smaller and less dense  population means the final casualty total will not match that of the  devastating quake two years ago.     But with schools lying in ruin and the bodies of students still being pulled  from the rubble, criticism of shoddy construction is once again being levied  on Chinese authorities.     In Jiegu, the hardest hit city, 56 children and five teachers were crushed in  collapsing schools or dormitories, according to ‘China Daily’ newspaper.  In  one incident, 22 children died when a vocation school toppled, and 20 more  were missing in the wreckage of a primary school.     Gu Guohua, a seismologist, said in an interview with state-run China  Central Television (CCTV) that 90 percent of the homes in Jeigu had  collapsed.  He described the houses — made of wood, mud and brick — as  being of 'quite poor quality. '   In nearby Yushu Tibetan Autonomous Prefecture, 70 percent of school  buildings collapsed, according to China National Radio.  'The death toll may  rise further as lots of houses collapsed,' said Wu Yong, commander of the  Yushu military area command of the Chinese People’s Liberation Army,  according to ‘Global Times’ newspaper.     In the 2008 Sichuan quake, thousands of students were killed in collapsed  schools.  Subsequent investigations revealed that poor design, faulty  construction and ignored or under-enforced building codes were rampant.   Both quakes occurred along the Longmenshan fault, which runs underneath  the mountains that divide the Tibetan plateau and Sichuan plain.     In another echo of the Sichuan quake, there was concern about the stability  of a cracked dam, forcing many residents to flee to nearby mountains.  Yushu  is home to the headwaters of the Yangtze, Mekong and Yellow rivers, all of  which are used to produce hydropower.     Across Qinghai the Chinese government has undertaken an aggressive  military-led relief effort, and over the weekend soldiers, medics and  volunteers flooded Jiegu.  President Hu Jintao flew to Jiegu on Sunday to  console victims.  'There will be new schools! There will be new homes!' Hu  wrote on a blackboard in a tent occupied by orphaned children, according to  the state Xinhua News Agency.    Chen Zhao Yuan, a professor of civil engineering at Tsinghua University  who specialises in seismic buildings, said that local governments in high-risk  zones have not done enough to prepare for major earthquakes, and that  building codes are routinely ignored.     'Sometimes code and implementation are two very different subjects,' Chen  told IPS.  'Seismic prevention code requires that all buildings should still be  standing after any major earthquake, but obviously this is not the case in our  country.  Most of the farmers build houses by themselves; they know nothing  about the building code.  So it’s the local governments’ job to supervise them,  but obviously they haven’t done a good job. '   After the Sichuan quake, the central government in Beijing began paying  closer attention to at-risk zones.     In July 2008, the Ministry of Housing and Urban-Rural Development and the  General Administration of Quality Supervision, Inspection and Quarantine  jointly published updated codes and standards for buildings’ seismic design.   Schools and other crowded public buildings were all targeted for improved  earthquake protection.     In Xinjiang province, 350,000 people moved into new earthquake-resistant  homes in 2009, according to Feng Peng, an associate professor at Tsinghua’s  School of Public Policy and Management.  But he says that both levels of  government need to work more closely together in order to better protect  these areas.     In 2008, Feng visited Wen Chuan, Sichuan, and found that buildings that  were constructed according to the country’s building codes were still  standing.  Those that were not were in ruins.  'The central government and  local governments need to make sure that the buildings are built according to  the building codes, and to make sure that no one cuts corners,' Feng said in  an interview with IPS.    Liu Xila, a professor of civil engineering at Shanghai Jiao Tong University,  said the problem is education and enforcement.  'We need to promote  earthquake knowledge to people in earthquake vulnerable areas.  Most of  these people don’t have the proper knowledge of what to do during an  earthquake,' Liu said.     Tsinghua’s Chen agrees.  He said that along with better-enforced building  codes, people in at-risk areas should be given earthquake survival training,  including non-scheduled safety drills.  'From what happened in the Wen  Chuan (Sichuan) earthquake and the Yu Shu (Qinghai) earthquake, we can tell  that most of the people — children and adults — didn’t know how to react,'  Chen said.  'Only the ones who did survived. '  