The European Union's anti-poverty chief has refused to concede that his  promotion of biofuels has helped exacerbate global hunger. Andris Piebalgs, the EU's commissioner for development aid, published a  paper Apr.  21 committing him to ensuring that work aimed at reducing  poverty is not undermined by the Union's activities in other policy areas such  as trade, agriculture and fisheries.  While the paper states that the Union's  officials have an 'obligation' to monitor the effects of biofuel production on  the world's poor, Piebalgs would not accept he was wrong to support the use  of food crops for power generation during his previous role as the EU's  energy commissioner. 'I can clearly state today that biofuel policy has done no damage in the  developing world,' Piebalgs told IPS.  'The focus is right. 'Holding the energy portfolio in the European Commission from 2004 until  last year, Piebalgs  was one of the most zealous defenders of an EU strategy  that at least 10 percent of all journeys undertaken on the bloc's roads by  2020 should be powered by biofuels.  Since that goal was set in 2007, it has encountered stiff opposition from  environmental campaigners and food policy analysts.  The World Food  Programme has held the greater use of biofuels at least partly responsible for  a spike in the prices of basic groceries that has pushed the number of people  who suffer from chronic hunger and malnutrition beyond a billion.  Food  crops used for cars and trucks include wheat, maize, soy, sugar and palm oil.  Piebalgs' stance contrasts with the findings of several studies undertaken at  the Commission's request.  An environmental impact assessment on the EU's  biofuels policy issued last month cast doubts on whether it will help slow  down the pace of climate change.  The assessment calculated that raising the  proportion of biofuels used for road transport above 5 percent in the next  decade would do more harm than good to the global environment as many  forests would be sacrificed to create room for biofuel plantations.  The Commission has so far refused to make public a series of other  documents relating to the biofuels target. 'Evidence is building that the EU's biofuels policy is leading to the destruction  of forests and rural areas, as well as pushing up food prices,' said Adrian  Bebb from Friends of the Earth.  'It is crystal clear that the EU's policy on  biofuels is not sustainable and it is only a matter of time before the EU needs  to change that policy.  Quite clearly, though, some commissioners are still in  denial. 'Earlier this year ActionAid predicted that an additional 600 million people  would join the ranks of the world's hungry by 2020 unless the EU scraps its  biofuels target.  Anne Catherine Claude, a campaigner with the organisation,  said that Piebalgs is 'probably afraid' of admitting the impact of biofuels  because he does not wish to upset the large energy and agribusiness  companies who have a vested interest in keeping the target.  The Union's  objective was originally set after EU officials consulted an advisory panel  comprising representatives of such firms as Shell, Abengoa, Total, British  Sugar, Nestlé and Volvo.  'The Commission cannot go on promoting the biofuels industry,' said  Claude.  'But this is difficult for it to acknowledge because it would mean that  companies involved in the biofuels industry would lose a lot of money. 'Piebalgs also presented a plan this week to increase the EU's aid to poor  countries. The 15 nations that made up the Union before it expanded into eastern  Europe in 2004 have all pledged to reserve 0. 7 percent of their income for  official development assistance by 2015.  Yet Piebalgs bemoaned how the  average proportion of income devoted to aid by the Union this year is only  around 0. 4 percent.  During 2009 the EU as a whole provided 49 billion euros (66 billion dollars)  in development aid.  According to Piebalgs, this figure must rise by 9 billion  euros per year to ensure that the promises for 2015 are honoured.  He urged the Union's governments to come forward with action plans giving  details of how they propose to increase their aid spending.  Such increases  should be possible even at a time when Europe is in financial difficulty, he  argued.  'If you compare this with national budgets, it is not really big money,'  he said. Piebalgs recommended, too, that greater attention should be paid to helping  poor countries collect higher tax revenues.  Extreme poverty cannot be  overcome unless capital flight and illicit capital flows are addressed, the  Commission said, citing estimates that poor countries lose between 641 and  979 billion dollars per year as a result of these problems. Anti-poverty campaigners generally welcomed the measures sought by  Piebalgs.  Elise Ford, a spokeswoman for Oxfam, said that the onus is now on  EU governments to cease cutting back on their aid allocations.  'Whilst some  countries like the UK, Spain and Belgium are taking serious steps towards  meeting their aid promises, others are really letting the side down,' she said.    'Italy's aid spending plunged last year by a massive 31 percent, Ireland's by  19 percent and Germany's by 12 percent. '  