Kyaw Moe is just in his 30s, but he is already on his second shot at life — just like  the rest of the residents of Thakan Ngu, a tiny Burmese village in this township  of Bogalay. On May 2, 2008, Kyaw Moe lost his wife and two children in the midst of  Cyclone Nargis, which slammed with all its Category 3 might through the  Irrawaddy Delta and the southern part of the Rangoon Division.  By the time  the skies cleared and the winds stopped blowing, Thakan Ngu — some six  hours by car and boat ride from the former capital Rangoon — had about half  of its population of nearly 300 either missing or dead. Estimates by foreign aid organisations put Nargis’s total fatalities in Burma at  some 140,000 while the United Nations says 2. 4 million people were affected  by the cyclone.  Total amount of damage and losses reached 4. 05 billion U. S.   dollars, according the Post-Nargis Joint Assessment (PONJA) report of the  United Nations, the Association of South-east Asian Nations (ASEAN), and the  Burmese government. International aid agencies have since been trying to help Nargis’ survivors  recover from the tragedy.  For instance, some 1. 1 million Burmese have been  given food aid in the two years after Nargis, says the U. N.  Assistance by  groups like the Myanmar Red Cross, World Vision, and the Paris-based Gret  have also enabled people like Kyaw Moe continue to till land for a living. But Nargis’s devastation was too great to make for a quick and simple  recovery.  Complicating matters is the changing weather that has had farmers  at a loss over what they can do to save their harvests and earn some money  for their families. 'We have not recovered yet because farm yield is in decline,' says Kyaw Moe,  who with his siblings works on a 11. 33-hectare collective farmland.  He  points to other factors that have hindered their progress: 'This year, rats  destroyed about two to three acres (. 81 to 1. 21 hectares) and farming cost  has increased. 'Fellow farmer Win Soe, meanwhile, is steeling himself for a nearly empty  wallet after harvest.  To plant rice on his land, he had taken out a loan from a  rice mill owner at a 50-percent interest, plus a promise that he would sell his  harvest to the lender at a price set by the latter.  But he now expects a yield  that is much less than he has hoped for. 'We knew it was going to be a big burden,' says Win Soe of the loan and  arrangement he has made for his crop.  'But we had no choice as we needed  the money to plant and harvest. 'Conceded Thierry Delbrevue, head of the United Nations Office for the  Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (UNOCHA) here: 'It is something that is  less understood by the donors….  Livelihood is one of the most critical sectors  actually, maybe after shelter. 'A 2007 survey by the government and U. N.  agencies had indicated that up to  60 percent of the families in the delta were engaged in agriculture.  In Thakan  Ngu, more than 20 of the 50 families are into farming while the rest are  casual labourers who rely on seasonal work such as fishing or helping raise  livestock or poultry. To be sure, after Nargis, rice farmers who owned land less than six hectares  were given seeds, fertiliser, and diesel for two farming cycles.  Power tillers  were provided for sharing among five to six farmers. But these proved inadequate for them to have harvests as good as they had  before the cyclone rampaged through their fields in 2008.  The Post-Nargis  Periodic Review III Tripartite Core Group (TCG) of the U. N. , ASEAN, and the  Burmese government reported that the provision of agricultural inputs  remains limited and the farm yields smaller than those before Nargis. The slowdown in the delta’s farming sector has affected non-landowners as  well.  Says Kyaw Moe: 'We can’t afford to hire labour like before because it’s a  burden to us.  With us working on our own, it means less jobs for casual  labourers. 'Thakan Nhu resident Khin Moe knows exactly what Kyaw Moe is saying.   Although her family received a cash grant equal to 100 dollars from the  United Nations Development Programme after Nargis, Khin Moe said it has  been tough going.  In the past, she and her husband were able to keep their family clothed and  fed by working as field hands and by fishing.  After Nargis, they tried living on  fishing alone. For every two families in the village, the non-profit group World Vision had  given a fishing net and boat, she says .  She and her husband took out a loan  to buy two more fishing nets, but they have not been able to catch much fish  from the river and are now drowning in debt. 'Before Nargis, farmers in our village could provide jobs for us,' Khin Moe  says.  'If we had (farm) jobs, we could pay the loan. ''Soon after Nargis, our life was very convenient as we received regular food  aid and some jobs were created by the organisations,' the 45-year-old adds.   'But life is getting harder now. 'UNOCHA’s Delbrevue worries that things may just get worse.  '(If) people will  not have any capacity, if they don’t have any asset…they will be extremely  vulnerable in the future. ' 