Local civil society organisations and community groups who rushed to help  victims after the powerful Cyclone Nargis tore through military-ruled Burma two  years ago are reaping rewards for their risky and tireless labour. Their work in the relief and reconstruction effort in the wake of Nargis, which  killed over 140,000 people and affected 2. 4 million people on May 3, 2008,  has prompted a policy shift in the way Western donor assistance flows to  humanitarian programmes.  'International donors had to review and redesign humanitarian funding after  Nargis to direct money for smaller programmes run by local community  groups,' admitted a European diplomat.  'It was a result of a learning curve  after the cyclone. ''If you wanted to increase outreach to different affected areas, you had to  work with smaller civil society organisations,' the diplomat who handles  Burmese affairs told IPS.  'We encourage large NGOs (non-government  organisations) to sub-contract work to smaller community groups. 'Some Western aid givers have even expanded their funding flow to include  community groups that 'operate under the radar and are not officially  registered as a CSO (civil society organisation),' added a Rangoon-based  diplomat.  'We acknowledge their view that they are far more effective and can  get humanitarian work done by not being openly identified by the  government. 'The European Union (EU), which gave 51. 8 million U. S.  dollars for relief  efforts, is among those reflecting this shift in donor assistance.  Money for  smaller humanitarian programmes that cost 10,000 euros (about 13,300 U. S.   dollars) was given in addition to the usual flow of funds for larger initiatives  by bigger, more established NGOs, which amounted to 500,000 euros  (664,980 dollars) from the EU. The bulk of the funding till this policy change was directed towards the 13  United Nations agencies and the estimated 54 international humanitarian  agencies and international NGOs (INGOs) operating in Burma.  The INGO  budget in 2009 was 128 million dollars, up from 48. 7 million dollars in 2008  before the cyclone struck. World Vision, a Christian charity working in Burma, also known as Myanmar,  is among the INGOs that turned to community groups to help victims in the  affected Irrawaddy Delta and the former capital Rangoon.  'They became very  significant to us during the reconstruction phase,' said Win Zin Oo, the  organisation’s humanitarian and emergency affairs director. 'The 10 cyclone shelters that we built were possible because of the  assistance from local CSOs,' he acknowledged during a telephone interview  from Rangoon.  'The bigger international NGOs and the U. N.  may have the  technical knowledge, but the community groups have the local knowledge  which helps in proper implementation. 'This increasing embrace of CSOs since Nargis is echoed in a just released  report by Human Rights Watch (HRW), the New York-based rights lobby, to  mark the second anniversary of Burma’s worst natural disaster.  'Individual  Burmese citizens and existing and newly created local civil society groups  played critical roles in bringing aid to those most in need,' revealed the 111- page report released here on Apr.  29. 'In the aftermath of the cyclone, thousands of people from throughout Burma  spontaneously became humanitarian workers,' added the report, ‘I Want to  Help My Own People: State Control and Civil Society in Burma after Cyclone  Nargis’.  'One positive post-cyclone development was the Burmese civil  society response. 'The achievement was all the more remarkable given the restrictive conditions  the junta imposes on CSOs and the roadblocks created to relief efforts soon  after the cyclone struck, said HRW.  'Just as international donors, U. N.   agencies and INGOs were organising a massive response to send aid and  relief workers into the country, the (regime’s) strict restrictions blocked many  of these efforts. 'And the lead taken by Burmese CSOs to step into that void and to help the  victims brought into sharp focus a community that had, till then, not been  recognised as pivotal players in the country’s humanitarian initiatives.  'It was  Cyclone Nargis that created the space for CSOs to enter the humanitarian  space, not the Burmese government,' said David Scott Mathieson, Burma  researcher for HRW. 'The post-Nargis phase has helped strengthen Burmese CSOs,' he added.   'They deserve most of the credit for the social response. ' The broad network of CSOs being hailed since the cyclone has roots in  Burma’s social fabric, from villages to cities.  They range from Buddhist  monks, community leaders, local activists, artists, doctors, and business  people to homemakers. Not all of them belong to the estimated 64 NGOs and 455 countrywide  community-based associations that operate openly, according to HRW, which  added that those outside government control pay a heavy price — including  jail for humanitarian work. Among Burma’s 2,200 political prisoners languishing in jails across the  country are 21 humanitarian workers who were arrested and jailed for leading  the civil society response to Nargis.  The most well known is Zarganar, one of  Burma’s famous comedians, who was part of an ad-hoc group of 420 relief  workers that helped 42 flattened villages in the Irrawaddy Delta, which was  the hardest hit by the disaster, in the first month after Nargis. He was sentenced to 35 years in jail.  Among his 'crimes' was being in  possession of video footage of the cyclone’s devastating impact on the delta. 