Like many who have profited from the electronic waste trade in this southern  Chinese town, hospital administrator Lin Banghong does not live there.  'I've  worked here 10 years and haven't gotten sick,' he said.   Lin, who lives in the nearby city of Shantou like most of the hospital board  members, also helps run the e-waste wholesale market in the centre of town  owned by the head of Yaohui Hospital.  The private hospital, one of only two  hospitals in this town of 130,000 people, is named after an e-waste tycoon  who donated the money to build it.  For migrant workers who come from across China to burn, smash and strip  old television sets, computers, mobile phones and copy machines for their  valuable metals and computer chips for one dollar an hour, 10 hours a day in  the 5,000-plus workshops in the village, living here is no luxury.  The price they may be paying is their long-term health, say Chinese  researchers. The world’s highest levels of dioxin — environmental pollutants that threaten  human health — have been recorded in Guiyu and are released into the air by  burning of plastics and circuit boards coated with flame retardants to extract  gold, platinum, copper and other metals, a 2007 report by the Chinese  Academy of Sciences found.  The main source of pollution is the burning of plastics in long blockhouses to  retrieve metals.  It also comes from heating circuit boards over molten solder  to remove chips and metals in the hundreds of small, family-run workshops  scattered around Guiyu.  The Lianjiang River running through Guiyu is classified as the most polluted  in China’s southern Guangdong province.  High levels of copper, nickel,  cadmium, lead, mercury and arsenic have been found in both surface water  and sediment in the river.  A United Nations Environment Programme report released on Feb.  22 says  that China generates 2. 3 million metric tonnes of electronic waste each year  domestically, second only to the United States, which produces 3 million  tonnes. Much of that U. S.  waste ends up being exported to developing countries like  China, where imports of electronic waste are banned but not enforced, says  Jim Puckett of the Basel Action Network.  About 1. 7 million tonnes of e-waste  are processed each year in Guiyu, says the local government.  Puckett says most of what comes into Guiyu is imported from abroad.   'There’s no hard data, but it's probably above 90 to 95 percent (overseas  waste),' says Puckett, who has visited Guiyu three times since 2001.  'I really  looked at the writing on the machines and types of plugs.  Guiyu doesn't get a  lot of Chinese waste. ' Recently published studies by researchers at Shantou University Medical  College show high levels of polybrominated diphenyl ethers (PBDEs) from  flame retardants, lead, cadmium and chromium in blood samples of infant  children of e-waste workers.  A 2008 study produced by the Shantou health researchers found that 81  percent of blood samples from Guiyu infants has 'significantly higher levels of  blood lead. ' Another 2008 study found high cadmium levels in 20. 1 percent  of infants there.  High chromium exposure leads to DNA damage in infants. The research indicates that these are leading to stillbirths, low birth weights  and premature deliveries and impacts on the children’s growth rates and  neurobehavioural development.  Arlene Blum, an expert on the health effects of chemicals in flame retardants  at the University of California Berkeley in the United States, says PBDEs have  been associated with cancer, thyroid effects, learning and memory problems,  decreased sperm quality and reduced male hormone levels.  Little is known about the health impact of e-waste processing on adults  toiling in the workshops of Guiyu.  Huo Xia, head of the research team at Shantou University, says that the  bosses at the e-waste workshops resist having workers take blood tests.   'The workshops are attached to private homes, so it makes it hard to get in,'  says Huo, whose research is now being funded by the U. S.  Ford Motor Co, in  an interview.  'The workers who come here are temporary, and once they get  sick, they go back to their villages.  It's hard to track them. 'Lin says that there are 'more newborns with cerebral palsy and more cases of  cancer' in Guiyu, 'but we can't guarantee these are caused by pollution.  None  of the tests absolutely confirm the relationship between these diseases and  pollution. ' It has become harder for Huo and her researchers to obtain blood samples of  migrant workers’ infants in Guiyu, now that Lin's hospital has stopped  allowing the sampling because it 'makes a lot of work for us'. It was unclear if the hassle over collecting and storing samples was the real  problem for Lin and the hospital board.  'We are worried our support for the  research will attract the attention of the local government,' he admits.  'We  are a private hospital and don't want to get into any trouble. 'With new national regulations on e-waste processing set to come into effect  in 2011, Guiyu’s government made plans in 2006 to turn it into a high- technology, environmentally friendly industry.  But the risky way of recycling may not go away so easily.  'China is never  going to be able to properly manage their e-waste as long as they allow this  massive magnet of Guiyu to exist,' says Puckett.  