India is facing strong pressure to open up its markets to cheese and other dairy  produce from Europe, even though the New Delhi government has expressed  fears about how small farmers could be forced into deeper poverty as a result. Because its dairy sector employs 90 million people, India has advocated that  milk and cheese be excluded from the scope of the free trade agreement  under negotiation with the European Union.  EU officials nonetheless stepped up their efforts to have India's agricultural  markets liberalised during the latest round of talks, which took place in the  last week of April.  A Brussels source said that moves to open up all  agricultural sectors are under discussion.  'It has not yet been decided which  products will be liberalised and India's sensitivities will certainly be taken into  account as negotiations progress,' the source told IPS.  Anti-poverty activists complain, however, that the EU has displayed scant  concern for the plight of India's rural poor until now.  While India's dairy sector is of critical importance in providing work and  income to farmers, particularly those who do not own land, Europe's cheese- makers have been adamant that protections offered to India's poor should be  dismantled. In 2007 -- the year that talks aimed at reaching an EU-India free trade  agreement were launched -- the European Dairy Association contended that  the taxes levied by the Delhi authorities on imported food were  'unrealistically high. ' But critics of the EU's trade strategies argue that  scrapping such tariffs would leave India's farmers unable to withstand  competition from European imports.  Often those imports have been highly  subsidised and can be sold at lower prices than domestically produced food. 'The EU is pushing very aggressively to open up some of the key sectors in  India that support huge numbers of producers and workers,' said Sophie  Powell from the fair trade organisation Traidcraft.  'For example, the dairy  sector is one of the most pro-poor sectors in India as it provides income for  millions of rural families, most of whom are landless or marginal farmers. 'Both the EU and India have set themselves an objective of removing 90  percent of the tariffs they apply to trade in goods between them in an  eventual agreement.  Negotiators are seeking to have this accord completed in  time for a high-level EU-India meeting in October.  A 2009 study by the Centre for Trade and Development, which monitors  economic issues affecting south Asia, found that women would bear the  brunt of any moves to expose India's dairy sector more to outside  competition.  Women comprise 75 million of the employees in that sector. Despite being one of the world's most populous countries, India absorbs less  than 0. 5 percent of the EU's total agricultural exports.  Europe's dairy  companies have identified the high tariffs as the main obstacle to expanding  their commercial ties with India.  The country's burgeoning middle class is  also regarded as offering great potential as buyers of the gourmet cheeses  more readily available in European shops. Trade analysts say that EU officials have stepped up their efforts to include  dairy within the scope of an agreement with India because of the crisis facing  Europe's milk farmers, who have been badly hurt by a decrease in the prices  they are being paid in the past few years.  This crisis prompted the EU to resume paying subsidies to exporters of  butter, cheese and skimmed milk powder in January 2009.  Such subsidies --  widely considered as harmful to farmers in poorer countries, where markets  have been flooded by European produce -- had been suspended in 2007. Paul Goodison from the European Research Office, a watchdog on trade  relations, noted that the EU has provided 1. 6 billion euros (2 billion dollars)  in assistance to dairy exporters over the past 10 months.  The sum is in  addition to the 5 billion euros per year already earmarked to the dairy sector  under the Union's common agricultural policy.  In a bid to compensate for the troubles facing European milk farmers at  home, the Union is 'very keen to get any market opening' it can abroad,  Goodison added.  Although the EU's long-term goal is to sell greater  quantities of regional delicacies or value-added produce like yoghurt drinks  that would not qualify for export subsidies to India, the immediate concern of  its officials is to increase the market share for goods that are subsidised. 'This is blatantly unfair competition,' said Goodison.  'It is a warning to any  developing country.  The EU makes its own rules when it is making trade  agreements. 'Sandeep Chachra, director of ActionAid in India, commented: 'Over 80  percent of the Indian peasantry are small and marginal farmers.  For their  livelihoods and survival, millions from this group depend on the dairy sector  to supplement their meagre incomes.  This sector cannot be opened up  without adequate protection to face the EU's highly subsidised and protected  dairy sector.  That would be a highly uneven competition on unequal terms,  disruptive to the lives and livelihoods of small and marginal Indian farmers. '  