Ever since the horror movie Jaws was released in 1975, sharks have been  regarded as deadly creatures in the public imagination of many countries.  The  deep irony - as a senior European Union official stressed Feb.  5 - is that  humans pose a far greater danger to sharks than vice-versa. Worldwide catches of sharks climbed from 600,000 tonnes to more than  810,000 tonnes between 1984 and 2004.  This exploitation has been so  intensive in Europe that the International Union for Conservation of Nature  has warned that one-third of the continent's shark species are at risk of  extinction. Notwithstanding the wider implications this has for the environment, shark  fishing has often been subject to flimsy regulation.  In an effort to fill this  legislative gap, the European Commission, the executive arm of the EU, has  put forward an action plan designed to protect sharks.  'Sharks sit at or near the top of the food system,' said Joe Borg,  commissioner for fisheries.  'They are very vulnerable to overexploitation, and  depleting their numbers may have very serious consequences not just for  sharks but also for marine ecosystems and for fishermen themselves. 'His plan recommends that the maximum yearly limits that EU governments  set for the amount of sharks that fishermen may catch should be in  accordance with scientific advice from international marine conservation  bodies.  It advocates, too, that fishermen should be banned from throwing  overboard sharks that become tangled up in their nets when they are  targeting other species.  And it suggests that efforts should be made to  improve the collection of data about shark fisheries in Europe, as well as to  introduce fishing gear that is less likely to scoop up sharks. The World Wide Fund for Nature (WWF) complained that some of the measures  proposed are too weak. 'The plan lacks a solid commitment to seek mandatory collection of data on  shark catch - a critical element if the EU is to succeed in the conservation of  these species,' said Aaron McLaughlin, spokesman on marine issues with the  organisation.  'Sharks are slow growing and produce relatively small numbers  of young.  Many of these species are already threatened with extinction. 'Another green campaign group, Oceana, has published a new report, stating  that EU countries play a major role in the shark trade.  While these countries  produced just 12 percent of world shark meat in 2005, they were responsible  for over half of all shark imports and more than 30 percent of exports.  The main reason why sharks are hunted is to sell their fins to Asian countries,  where shark fin soup is popular among gourmands.  France, the Netherlands  and Spain are known to have been involved in the shark fin trade in recent  years.  This was despite an EU-wide ban on shark finning that came into effect in  2003.   While the measure forbade fishermen from cutting the fins off sharks  and then hurling the remaining carcasses overboard, it allowed fins to be  removed, provided the entire shark was brought to shore.  Borg has urged EU member states to strengthen the ban and to consider  closing its loopholes.  For example, he has argued that the removal of shark  fins on board should be outlawed as a general rule.  Borg is hoping that the plan will be approved by EU governments and the  European Parliament by the end of this year, so that the measures envisaged  in it can be put in place by 2012 or 2013.  The plan applies to all cartilaginous  fish, the 'family' to which sharks, skates, ray and chimaeras belong.  Over 50  percent of all shark catches by EU vessels are made in the North Atlantic.  Spain and China are the world's largest exporters of shark fins.  About 10  percent of the fins traded on the Hong Kong market are believed to have  come from Spain.  Vigo, a port in the Spanish region of Galicia, and Las  Palmas in the Canary Islands are the main European centres for the fin trade.  The organisation Shark Alliance has welcomed the action plan and called on  EU fisheries ministers to support it during discussions scheduled for April. Sonja Fordham, the group's policy director, said: 'The plan's commitments to  science-based fishing limits, endangered species protection and a stronger  finning ban are essential to securing a brighter future for some of Europe's  most vulnerable and neglected animals.  The success of the EU shark plan  depends on prompt follow-up proposals from the Commission and  cooperation from member states in ensuring that improvements are accepted  and enforced. ' 