Instead of going nuclear, the Malaysian government should be harnessing  alternative energy resources, which are adequate in supply, said the country’s  anti-nuclear lobby. In a move that surprised many, among others for lack of public consultations,  minister for energy, green technology and water Peter Chin Fah Kui  announced on May 3 that the government had approved plans to build a  nuclear power station to produce electricity and have it up and running by  2021, citing the country’s growing energy needs.   Chin’s statement that the country’s depleting fossil fuel alongside its  expanding energy needs warranted the use of inexhaustible nuclear power  was dismissed as rubbish by environmentalists and energy experts alike. Malaysian had long argued that nuclear power was unnecessary in a country  blessed with ample alternative energy sources. Mohideen Abdul Kader, a senior adviser to the environmental group Friends  of the Earth Malaysia, expressed anger at the sudden announcement. 'We are upset and angry that the government does not want to engage with  stakeholders.  It is shocking news.  Under ex-prime minister Dr Mahathir  Mohamad, the government said it was not going nuclear.  There is now a total  U-turn on our policy,' he said. Chin told IPS the government weighed 'all available' options for long-term  energy needs before it decided to go nuclear.  'We have to look at energy  security.  No country can grow without energy, no gross domestic product can  progress without energy,' he said in an interview. 'Clearly, Malaysia has more energy than it needs.  Without any economic  grounds or energy security justification, why is Malaysia going nuclear?'  asked Lim Guan Eng, secretary general of the Malaysian Democratic Action  Party and chief minister of the opposition-ruled Penang state, situated north  of West Malaysia. 'Alternative sources of energy are the way (to go) and Malaysia is rich and  blessed in these areas,' prominent environmentalist Gurmit Singh told IPS.   'We should exploit these alternative sources before even thinking of going  nuclear. 'Malaysia must be ready to develop energy-efficient technology and brave  enough to invest in solar, hydro and wind power,' he added.    Singh, who heads the Center for Environment, Technology and Development,  a local think tank, warned that nuclear power was capital-intensive and very  risky, because it generates radioactive waste that has to be discarded. 'Malaysians wonder what assurances can be given in relation to safety and  environment following the 1986 Chernobyl nuclear plant accident in Ukraine  that claimed 56 lives and resulted in 4,000 cancer deaths,' he said in a  statement.  'There are obvious and real concerns over nuclear power. ' Singh added that the cost of nuclear waste disposal is expensive.  'Once a  country enters the nuclear path, it faces a mountain of bills,' he said.  He  urged the government to instead bolster energy efficiency and turn to other  renewable sources like wind and solar power.  The size, composition and foreign partner that will be involved in the  construction of the planned nuclear plant are still unknown. In 2008 state energy corporation Tenaga Nasional, which has private  shareholdings, said it had the capacity to build the country’s first 1,000- megawatt nuclear power plant at a cost of 3 billion U. S.  dollars using foreign  technology and capital assistance.   The government had asked Tenaga to study the nuclear option because oil  prices were surging then and oil and coal-fired power plants were becoming  too costly to maintain. 'There is a strong undercurrent of Malay nationalism behind the urge to go  nuclear,' charged opposition lawmaker Murugesan Kulasegaran, adding it is  part of same macho ‘Malaysia Boleh’ (Malaysia can!) culture that sent a  Malaysian into space on a Russian rocket. In October 2007, a Russian Soyuz spacecraft launched Malaysia's first  astronaut into space, Sheikh Muszaphar Shukor, a university lecturer and  orthopedic surgeon. Malaysia’s south-east Asian neighbours, namely, Thailand and Vietnam, have  already unveiled plans to operate their first nuclear power plants by 2020  while Indonesia has plans to build its own on Java Island by 2015. But unlike these countries, critics say Malaysia has a 40 percent energy  reserve margin, double the government’s target of 20 percent reserves,  making the construction of a nuclear reactor unnecessary. Malaysia’s power usage is about 14,000 megawatts now out of a total  national capacity of 23,000 megawatts.  Several giant dams with additional  7,000-megawatt capacity are coming on stream on Borneo Island, partly  occupied by the Malaysia states of Sarawak and Sabah, with plans to ship the  energy across the South China Sea using undersea cables. Malaysia uses coal and natural gas to generate most of its electricity supply.   The government has repeatedly warned that the cost of relying on both  commodities is expected to spiral in the decades ahead as supply diminishes  and demand increases. 