The indigenous peoples of the Amazon region of Bolivia have declared  themselves in a 'state of emergency' and announced that on May 20 they will  begin a 1,000-kilometre march to La Paz to demand that the government  defend their territory from being plundered by oil, logging and mining  companies. 'The country’s constitution is being violated, as is the International Labour  Organisation (ILO) Convention 169, which recognises the territories and  rights of indigenous peoples,' said María Saravia, the communications  secretary of the Confederation of Indigenous Peoples of Eastern Bolivia  (CIDOB), which represents one million members.  'We cannot continue turning a blind eye to the situation.  If we don’t reach an  agreement with the government, the march will begin on May 20,' Saravia  told IPS.  This will be the seventh march undertaken by indigenous communities in the  Bolivian Amazon to defend their rights.  The announcement of another march highlights the balancing act faced by  the left-wing government of Evo Morales, the country’s first indigenous  president, who has internationally championed the rights of native peoples  and the environment, at the same time that the state is heavily dependent on  natural gas exports, the country's main source of foreign exchange, and on  exports of minerals like tin, zinc, gold and silver. In a statement released on May 14 announcing the upcoming march, the  Central Organisation of Indigenous Peoples of La Paz (CPILAP) addressed  Morales, saying, 'We hope you will understand that this is not a personal  attack,' but adding that action must be taken in the face of 'major socio- environmental impacts that directly affect us. ' 'Mr.  President, the rights of indigenous people are being violated here.  Mr.   President, the rights of we, the people, are being violated here, and we hope  that you can put yourself in our place and defend us from these abuses,' the  statement adds.  José Ortiz, the president of CPILAP, told IPS that the plan is for roughly 800  people to begin the 1,105-kilometre march in Riberalta, in the northeastern  province of Beni.  Along the way, they will be joined by indigenous people  from CIDOB’s 11 member organisations throughout the Amazon basin.  The indigenous peoples of the Amazon region make up 10 percent of the 10  million inhabitants of Bolivia, where over 60 percent of the population are  native people, mainly belonging to the Quechua and Aymara ethnic groups  concentrated in the western highlands.  In 1990, a delegation of indigenous people trekked from Trinidad, the capital  of Beni, to the seat of government in La Paz, where they succeeded in getting  their demands for land rights and the convening of a constituent assembly to  rewrite the constitution on the political agenda.  That first march is now considered a landmark event in Bolivian history and  sparked a process of political and social changes that culminated in the new  constitution adopted in February 2009 after a nationwide referendum.  But the new constitution has not served as a shield against the companies  and individuals who are plundering the natural wealth of the country's  northeast Amazon region and destroying the way of life of its indigenous  communities, according to activists.  'President Morales should listen and be sensitive to what is happening and  rethink the course of change together with social movements,' Amazon  indigenous leader Cristian Domínguez told IPS.  Domínguez is the secretary of defence of natural resources and the  environment at the Bolivian Confederation of Campesino Workers, the  country’s largest organisation of peasant farmers.   He is also one of the guiding forces behind defence of the environment within  the ruling Movement Towards Socialism party, and shares with Morales the  belief that the capitalist economic model is to blame for the planet’s  destruction.  But Domínguez disagrees with some of the new advisors working with  Morales, who came to power in January 2006 and began a second presidential  term in January after his landslide re-election in December.  Domínguez accuses these unnamed individuals of 'becoming drunk with  power and following the footsteps of the right,' while ignoring the needs and  demands of indigenous peoples.   For her part, Saravia maintained that the rights of indigenous peoples are  held up like a banner on the international stage, but their demands are  ignored within the country itself.  That is why the upcoming march will specifically highlight the demand for  three rights: 'territory, dignity and autonomy,' she said.  Among the reasons behind the protest, CIDOB complained about the  government’s slow progress in providing title deeds for their ancestral lands  to indigenous communities, plans to establish settlements in forest reserves,  and attempts by new settlers to undermine the land rights of the Tacana  people, who live on the banks of the Beni River along the border between the  province of the same name and La Paz.  CIDOB also accuses the government of using 'dishonest and corrupt  consultation methods' to obtain approval from indigenous communities for  the construction of a stretch of the Trans-Oceanic Highway -- an  infrastructure megaproject jointly undertaken by Bolivia, Brazil and Peru --  between the towns of Villa Tunari, in the central province of Cochabamba,  and San Ignacio de Moxos, in Beni.  Other major threats to the environment highlighted by the organisation are  the plans for the Cachuela Esperanza hydroelectric dam on the Beni River,  which will involve a two billion dollar investment and generate 1,000  megawatts of power; and the construction of another dam in El Bala, which is  located within the borders of Madidi National Park, a protected area in the  province of La Paz.  On top of these megaprojects, CIDOB also denounced the dangers posed by  the ongoing seismic testing, drilling and mining operations that stretch  throughout the Amazon basin to the semi-arid Chaco region of southeastern  Bolivia.   