The debate surrounding the evacuation decree for eight  'favelas' or slums in  this Brazilian city, ordered by the Rio municipal government citing the danger of  landslides, has taken a new course with the release of a study that undermines  the official argument. Investigations by the Land and Housing Group of the Rio state government's  People's Advocate Office concluded that 'there is no technical basis for the  evacuation' of the Morro dos Prazeres favela that the municipal Geotechnical  Institute (Geo-Rio) had recommended. Mayor Eduardo Paes signed the compulsory evacuation order based on the  Geo-Rio report.  On Apr.  10, Paes announced that 3,600 families would be  evicted from the communities of Morro do Urubú, Fogueteiro, Tabajaras,  Laboriux, Cantinho do Céu and Pantanal, in Morro do Turano, Parque  Colúmbia and the Morro dos Prazeres. The measure was decreed two days after the heavy rainstorm that claimed  the lives of 256 people, most killed in landslides in the favelas, the crowded  neighbourhoods that climb the hills, or 'morros,' of Rio.  Thousands were left  homeless. The landscape of favelas spread over the hills is emblematic of this city of six  million people.  Based on data from the 2000 census, the Pereira Passos  Institute estimates that the favelas are home to one million. In the Land and Housing Group's initial and supplementary studies, 'there is  nothing that is coherent with the finding that the entire neighbourhood  should be displaced,' said engineer Mauricio Campos, head of research at the  People's Advocate Office. Campos added that 'the rest of the research conducted in the eight favelas is  questionable' because Geo-Rio 'marked areas with containment walls that  have withstood the rains as 'danger zones'. 'The technical review that Campos signed does recommend the 'relocation of  families that live in landslide zones,' but differs from the official decree  because it recommends relocation 'within the same neighbourhood or  nearby areas,' as the Municipal Organic Law stipulates. Based on this latest report by the Group -- which will also review Geo-Rio's  work in Fogueteiro, Tabajaras and Laboriux -- the residents will ask the city  to call off all evictions from the favelas.  The decree 'masks the intent to drive up property values of nearby lands and  neighbourhoods by relocating the favelas,' said Marcelo Chamorro, a building  owner in Tabajaras. In his favela, 'the rains didn't cause any injuries, deaths or landslides,' he  said, adding, 'This is a favela-neighbourhood.  We pay taxes and pay for  services, anti-landslide containment walls were built, and the neighbourhood  is paved. ''This neighbourhood has been registered with the municipal government  since 1988,' Chamorro said.  'That is why the demolition of perfectly good  houses and the compensations offered above market value make me think  this is pure real estate speculation. ' Homeowners were offered settlements of 40 percent more than the taxed  value of their houses as an incentive to seek housing elsewhere. Seven of the favelas included in the decree border middle-class and wealthy  neighbourhoods.  'In Morro dos Prazeres we have one of the best views in  Rio,' said Soraide Gomes, who has lived there 28 years.  'They want us out  because this land is worth a fortune. 'Between 1995 and 2002, 14 million dollars was spent on infrastructure in  Morro dos Prazeres.  'There were only landslides where no work was done,  like Sector 42 and in Pequeno Prazeres, areas that were annexed to the  community. 'Included in the danger zones before the April rainstorms were 13,000  homes. In the view of Jorge Barbosa, one of the coordinators of the non- governmental Favela Observatory, 'the real estate and construction industries  are not interested in investing in low-income housing because they want a  fast financial return. ' Barbosa, an expert in urban planning with a doctorate in geography, told IPS:  'It's a lie that it isn't viable to urbanise the favelas, and this clean-up through  evictions is a moral affront to the social fabric of those who are displaced. ' The displaced who were renting their homes are included in a government  plan that provides a 218-dollar monthly subsidy for three months. And renters as well as homeowners can sign up for the federal government's  'My House, My Life' programme, which builds low-income neighbourhoods in  the city centre and suburbs. 'That money is only enough to rent in outlying areas, and resolves nothing  because those people have lost everything,' said Barbosa. Luanda de Castro lived until May 16 in one of the shelters the city improvised  in a school, 'because the landslide destroyed half of my house, which was  made of wood and mud. ' A single mother with two daughters and  unemployed, she lived in Morro do Turano until last month. 'Now I'm going to start receiving the rent subsidy and sign up for My House,  My Life, because I have nowhere to go,' she said. Cristiane Susana Silva, Castro's neighbour in the favela and in the shelter,  supports the evacuation.  'I don't want to relive that day,' she said.  'I can't  blame this government because nobody ever invested in infrastructure in  Turano. ' 