The world's multilateral credit institutions have often faced the criticism that  they cause more problems than they prevent.  As the challenges increase, such  as those posed by climate change, the debate is shifting to environmental  financing. The Fourth Assembly of the Global Environment Facility (GEF), being held May  24-28 in the Uruguayan resort city of Punta del Este, seems a propitious  occasion to ask the question: Does financing for the environment work?Shamva, an area in northern Zimbabwe, was known decades ago for its  tobacco, maize, cotton, beans and coffee, which grew without using  irrigation.  But there is less and less rain, and rivers have dried up, in part due  to deforestation. Although the last harvest left many dinner plates empty, Shamva was not on  the national list of those in need of food aid 'because of the general  perception that Shamva is an agriculturally productive area,' local activist  Isaac Chidavaenzi told Tierramérica. In November 2008, Chidavaenzi launched the Chengaose Foundation Trust to  dig wells, and obtained 50,000 dollars through GEF's Small Grants  Programme, ultimately benefitting 7,000 villagers in the Madziwa area of  Shamva, in Mashonaland Central Province. With the initial funds, many dug their wells.  But due to delays in the required  reports from the Chengaose Trust, the local partner, the GEF did not release  the remaining 20,000 dollars, which were necessary to install pumps, tanks  and pipelines to irrigate the villagers' gardens. 'I have water, but the problem is how to take it to the garden,' said  Goodreach Masuku, one of the farmers who met May 10 with the GEF/SGP  officials. More and more people want to have their water well, said Khethiwe Mhlanga,  national GEF/SGP coordinator.  'Ours is a pilot project that should show the  way for many others to copy and follow. . .  but there is a real struggle to keep  within those numbers,' she told Tierramérica. In the last three years, the GEF/SGP has assisted 30 communities in  Zimbabwe, spending 1. 2 million dollars -- not much for a country of 11. 4  million people submerged for years in agricultural and institutional crises. The Small Grants Programme handles less then one percent of the money  from GEF, the leading international financial organisation dedicated to the  environment.  The Facility was created by the World Bank in 1991, when that  institution was battered by criticism for promoting environmentally  destructive investments. Today, 'even the fierce critics of GEF think it is wonderful,' Zoe Young, author  of the 2002 book 'A New Green Order? The World Bank and the Politics of the  Global Environment Facility,' told Tierramérica in a phone interview. The money 'is going to small local groups who know the locations, know  what needs to be done for particular conservation efforts, and that money is  working,' she said, but added that it has not been an efficient financing  model when it involves billions of dollars. Far from Zimbabwe, in the Caribbean island nation of Cuba, a biodiversity  protection programme received 10 million dollars from the GEF, distributed  since 1993 amongst three projects. The focus is the Camagüey Savanna Ecosystem, which covers 19,000 square  kilometres of watersheds and more than 2,500 small islands, or keys, along  the north coast.  The area is home to 2. 3 million people. The aim of the project is to harmonise tourism, farming, forestry and fishing,  without damaging the rich local environment.  In addition to the GEF, there are  contributions from the Cuban government, the United Nations Development  Programme (UNDP), Canadian cooperation and the Worldwide Fund for  Nature, UN official Gricel Acosta told Tierramérica. Mangroves, marine grasslands and coral reefs, with an abundance of endemic  species, are emblematic of the area.  After 17 years, the initiative is in its third  phase, and what has been learned can be applied in other areas, said  researcher María Elena Perdomo, of the Environmental Research and Services  Centre, in Villa Clara province. Perdomo told Tierramérica that she values 'the capacities to deepen  knowledge about the resources and help in the search for alternatives for the  sustainable use of biodiversity. 'According to Maria Athena Ballesteros, of the World Resources Institute, for  countries like Mexico and those from the Caribbean that are adopting low- carbon production models, the GEF 'should consider meeting the initial high  costs of those low-carbon options. ' For example, 'Mexico is supporting a sustainable transport initiative.  They  would probably benefit from some grant money to support human,  institutional, and technical capacity,' Ballesteros said. 'The question is, does GEF have the capacity to back the most promising  technologies in developing countries, to support policy innovations and  investments towards real transformation, which is what is necessary to stop  climate change?' Ballesteros said. When money is limited, tough choices have to be made. To date, the GEF has provided 8. 7 billion dollars in grants for more than  2,400 environmental projects in 165 developing countries and emerging  economies.  The funds pledged for the next four years total 4. 25 billion  dollars, less than half what is considered necessary by the North American  network of non-governmental organisations accredited by the Facility. But from another perspective, the problem isn't money. Do we really need a global financial institution to fund efforts to confront  problems like climate change, biodiversity loss and desertification?'These are serious problems. . .  Money would help, yes, and some action is  needed, but my answer is no,' said Zoe Young. When the GEF was created, 'it was a proposal that environmental expertise  should go into shaping every project of the World Bank and of all the  international public finance entities,' she said. 'If you took these billions of dollars and all these experts and used them to  establish international regulation for energy efficiency, industrial standards,  multinational energy companies, safe emissions levels. . .  so many people  could benefit,' said Young. In her view, creating a climate change fund is a futile effort.  'If you have good  standards for all the investments and the public money goes to setting those  standards, then you don't need all these strange inventions like carbon  market and carbon offsetting' for greenhouse gas emissions, she said. But the GEF exists and has been gaining influence since it became  independent of the World Bank in 1994, though the Bank is still responsible  for its administration. Today the GEF is the economic instrument of the UN conventions on climate  change, persistent organic pollutants, biodiversity and desertification, among  other functions. * Ephraim Nsingo (Harare), Matthew Cardinale (Atlanta) and Patricia Grogg  (Havana) contributed reporting.  This story was originally published by Latin  American newspapers that are part of the Tierramérica network.  Tierramérica  is a specialised news service produced by IPS with the backing of the United  Nations Development Programme, United Nations Environment Programme  and the World Bank.  