Governments from the European Union and from Latin America and the  Caribbean are confident that at year's end the international climate conference  will produce a concrete legal mandate to truly protect the environment. The 16th Conference of Parties (COP 16) to the United Nations Framework  Convention on Climate Change will take place starting Nov.  29 in the Mexican  resort city of Cancún. Leaders from both regions have pledged joint actions for sustainable  development, especially strategies to reduce climate-changing greenhouse  gas emissions. Mexican President Felipe Calderón stated that one of the ways to achieve that  goal is the upcoming launch of the European Union-Latin America/Caribbean  (Eurolac) Foundation. 'It is a space for dialogue and agreement between the two regions,' said  Calderón of the initiative that came out of the 6th European Union-Latin  America/Caribbean Summit, held May 18 in Madrid. Spain's Secretary of State for Climate Change Teresa Ribera told Tierramérica  that her country 'will dedicate itself to using the lessons learned in the  Ibero-American forum in our international cooperation policies for the region  through various initiatives. 'Among them, she named the Clean Development Mechanism, as set out in  the Kyoto Protocol on Climate Change; the UN Development Programme's  Millennium Development Goal Achievement Fund; the REDD initiative  (Reducing Emissions from Deforestation in Developing Countries); and  cooperation among meteorology services on climate matters. As for the pollution caused by Spanish transnational corporations in Latin  America, Ribera said, 'The government has promoted a law that regulates the  environmental responsibility of those companies. . .  although it is difficult to  ensure they obey the laws of other countries. ''Other tools are essential, such as, of course, the local governments, but also  the companies' social responsibility and brand image in public opinion and  the markets,' she added. 'Today, environmental ethics are a factor of leadership in business, and the  market value of companies is increasingly linked to the presence or absence  of risk in their environmental behavior,' Ribera said. The Spanish official added, 'If we want to halt the increase in greenhouse gas  emissions, we have to make the best practices and available technologies  widespread, we have to reverse deforestation, and we have to promote  innovation and consistency in the decisions of government and the private  sector. 'However, environmental activists are wary of the market-based nature of the  agreements. 'Most of the agreements between the two regions are determined by their  market profile, which responds to a clearly liberalising and deregulatory  model, in which environmental issues do not play a determining role,' Pablo  José Martínez Osés, coordinator of Plataforma 2015 y Más, an umbrella of 14  Spanish non-governmental organisations. 'The potential joint accords that will materialise either through international  cooperation or the Cancún Summit, sadly, will remain subordinate to market  interests of profitability for a few owners on one side or the other,' Martínez  Osés said. 'We have asked the Spanish government to help put an end to the impunity  with which our country's companies operate in foreign territories, limiting  regulations and rights to the maximum,' he added.  In the activist's opinion, 'to achieve a true reduction in greenhouse gas  emissions, we must reform the norms and mechanisms of an irrational,  predatory system. ''Proposals must be introduced that are linked to food sovereignty, an  economy based on and oriented to human rights, and the capacity of  governments to plan and decide on economic policies,' he said. (*This story was originally published by Latin American newspapers that are  part of the Tierramérica network.  Tierramérica is a specialised news service  produced by IPS with the backing of the United Nations Development  Programme, United Nations Environment Programme and the World Bank. ) 