Providing technology to communities to ensure food security doesn't work if  local traditions and social dynamics are not taken into account, concluded the  participants in a forum here at the Fourth Assembly of the Global Environment  Facility. In Petrolina, a town in Brazil's Northeast region, 'they purchased technology  packages to produce banana and onion, and they failed because there was no  technical assistance or follow-up,' Espedito Rufino de Araújo told IPS.  He is  the director of the Dom Helder Camara Project, under the Brazilian Ministry of  Agriculture and the International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD). 'They tried to apply methods that came from elsewhere and were unknown to  the local people,' said Araújo, referring to a government initiative for the San  Francisco and Paraíba valleys, which included collaboration from international  organisations. He said this is a common occurrence.  Agricultural technology packages are  distributed to communities 'to fight the food crisis' and are intended to be  sustainable with the environment and local natural resources, but often end  in failure. 'For example, in the Northeast of Brazil we have 110 different geo- environmental areas.  One can't distribute the same package to the 110 sites  that have different cultures and socio-environmental conditions,' he said in  an interview after participating in a panel discussion entitled 'Can we feed  the world and safeguard the environment?'The discussion took place as part of the Fourth Assembly of the GEF, which  was created in 1991 by the World Bank and is the world's largest funder of  projects to improve the global environment. Delegates from the 181 GEF member countries and from more than 400 non- governmental organisations gathered May 24-26 in the Uruguayan resort city  of Punta del Este to conduct its fifth round of fund renewal and to determine  the priorities for the next four years. One of the top issues in the Assembly's various events was precisely the  relationship between food security and environmental protection. The world's agricultural production must increase 70 percent in order to feed  the 9 billion people projected to inhabit the planet by 2050, according to the  United Nations Food and Agriculture Organisation (FAO).  But agriculture relies  on limited natural resources and has a heavy impact on ecosystems. According to the forum, given this context it is essential to develop and  disseminate new techniques as well as recuperate traditional methods. One example cited in the discussion was an innovative irrigation system  developed in the Middle East: a network of surface pipeline that can use  almost any type of water, whether fresh, salty or contaminated.  The British  multinational firm Design Technology & Irrigation designed the system in  collaboration with IFAD and the government of Jordan, a country that is 75  percent desert. 'Our position is not against technology transfer, but rather one that favours a  more participatory relationship.  We have to do this with technical assistance,  research, follow-up, and a demonstration so that the farmers can  incorporate the necessary knowledge,' Araújo said. José Luis Tuquinga, a 'chakarero' (an indigenous agricultural wise man),  works on the Runa Kawsay Project in Ecuador to empower indigenous  organisations to recuperate their traditional products.  Too often, he said,  technology transfer is forced upon the communities. Tuquinga explained that the way of life of the indigenous peoples 'is a  system linked to the protection of Pachamama (Mother Earth).  The use of  pesticides and inputs inappropriate for the earth doesn't work. 'In the project, financed by GEF and carried out by FAO, utilises millennia-old  knowledge and methods and locally produced organic fertilisers to bring back  traditional foods like oca (a tuber), quinoa (a high-protein grain). The project's national coordinator, Marco Vivar, told IPS that many technical  manuals have been drafted in Ecuador, but sometimes they don't work. 'In a trip I made through more than 200 communities, I didn't find even one  indigenous person using this.  So then the question becomes: What are we  doing and how?' he said. In his opinion, technical assistance should be used to complement the work  already being done at the local level. 'The idea is to respect local dynamics and complement what is needed in  order to improve.  It may sound like a basic principle, but it's complicated to  implement,' he said. The latest increase in GEF funds means greater possibilities for expanding  technology transfer, according to Charles Riemenschneider, director of FAO's  investment centre.  At the Punta del Este meet, the delegates agreed a 52- percent hike in GEF funds, bringing the total to 4. 25 billion dollars available  for the next four-year period. GEF provides resources to developing countries and transition economies for  projects related to conservation, climate change, international waters, soil  degradation, and persistent organic pollutants.  The GEF Assembly, which wrapped up its sessions on Wednesday, formally  agreed to serve as the financial instrument of the UN Convention to Combat  Desertification, adopted in 1994.  