It is Saturday morning and the Pollhana beach, 160 kilometres south of the  capital Colombo, is jampacked as usual with local and foreign tourists alike, who  are either playing in the sand or bathing in its calm, shallow water, which is  gleaming under the sunlight. On the horizon, a couple of shadows appear to be walking on water, bending  every now and then to pick up something that is not quite visible from afar.  The figures are those of curious visitors walking on coral reefs, which lie  about 500 metres away from the shore, acting as bulwarks against turbulent  waves.  The visitors are collecting coral samples on the reef, which they will  carry away as mementos of their joyous jaunt to Pollhena. Walking on corals may not be too rampant among beach lovers as to turn the  delicate organisms to dust under their feet.  But it is one practice that has  combined with many others to hasten the destruction of the reefs located  around the island, according to experts.  In Hikkaduwa, about 60 km north of Pollhena, glass bottom boats with  outboard engines travel back and forth from Sri Lanka’s most popular coral  reef, carrying visitors who turn giddy at the sight of the corals.  The boats  swirl and turn over the reef and quickly head to shore.  The ride to the reef  takes less than three minutes and the ride back even lesser. Watching this whole scenario unfold, environmental advocate Somadasa de  Silva’s eyes narrow, the furrows on his forehead showing anger.  'They are destroying it — they are just destroying the reef,' the man, who has  spent over three decades fighting for the conservation of the reef, told IPS as  he stood on the shore.  De Silva is an experienced diver and a conservationist  who has made it his mission to save the reef. He said unchecked exploitation of the reef is putting it under pressure in the  limited areas where they are found in Sri Lanka.  Reefs are spread over less  than 2 percent or about 32 km of the island state’s total coastline of 1,580,  according to the National Aquatic Resources, Research and Development  Agency of Sri Lanka (NARA).  'Look at the boats — they travel at very high speeds over the reef, disturbing  the marine ecosystem.  When this is a regular occurrence, the damage is  tremendous,' De Silva whined.  Most of the boat hands are inexperienced and  do not know how to handle a boat over the delicate reef, he added.  The boats also dump fuel and other harmful effluents on coral reefs.  The  practice goes unchecked, according to de Silva.  Visitors to the reefs or even  to the surrounding beaches have an unfortunate habit of taking pieces away,  either as ornaments or souvenirs, he said.  In Sri Lanka’s northern Jaffna Peninsula, police warn each bus that travels to  the famous Naga Deepa temple — a Buddhist temple with a reef close by — not  to take home any corals.  'Please don’t buy these; don’t pick them up from  the shore.  You will have to leave them here,' officers warn busloads of  tourists while pointing at nearby buckets filled with corals.  'The problem is that people are not aware of the value of reefs,' said  Sumedha Kulatunga, manager of the Pollhena Reef Garden Hotel.   Coral reefs, also dubbed rainforests of the ocean, are known for their rich  biodiversity and serve as breeding grounds of many fish.  The ‘Status of Coral  Reefs of the World: 2008’ report stated that 19 percent of the world's reefs  are effectively lost while 20 percent are under threat of extinction in the next  20 to 40 years. Research by NARA found that the major causes of damages to the reef were  coral mining in the sea, destructive fishing and unbridled harvesting.  De Silva  said that wanton fishing using unsuitable nets and sometimes dynamites  could only be regulated on reefs near the beach, not beyond.  The extent of coral destruction in Sri Lanka, according to NARA, is such that  reefs as old as 5,000 years have been damaged, especially along the south- western coast of Sri Lanka, which is the most densely populated part of the  country, since it is home to about two-thirds of the country’s population of  22 million. De Silva, who regularly dives into the reef, expressed fears that as much as  50 percent of Hikkaaduwa’s original reefs may be under threat.  'When you go  there, you can see the destruction,' he said as he showed pictures of big  empty patches on the reef.  'Its ecological value aside, the reefs saved the coastline during the (December  2004 Indian Ocean) tsunami from being pulverised,' Pollhena Reef Garden  Hotel’s Kulatunga said.  Hikkaduwa was hit, but not as hard, and many believe  it was the reef that saved it from more harm, he said.  De Silva is lobbying for a national campaign to save Sri Lanka’s remaining  coral reefs.  One of his recommendations is the enforcement of tougher  penalties for those who damage the reef and a total ban on coral mining.   'They (the reefs) take thousands of years to grow; we destroy them in  decades, even less,' he said while watching with despair an all too familiar  sight on the open sea from the Pollhana beach — of glass bottom boats  bobbing up and down over the reef as passenger tourists marvel at the sight  of one of nature’s wonders now in danger of extinction.   