Deeper cuts to the European Union's greenhouse gas emissions than those  approved by its governments would be less expensive than previously thought,  according to a new analysis. Since 2007, the EU has been officially committed to lowering the amount of  carbon dioxide and other climate changing pollutants released into the  atmosphere by 20 percent below 1990 levels by 2020.  But a paper published  by its executive branch, the European Commission, May 26 indicates that  meeting a more ambitious target of a 30 percent reduction within that  timeframe should not prove too burdensome for the Union's economies.  Decreases in the use of energy caused by both a recession and by higher fuel  prices have led to the projected cost of hitting the 20 percent goal being  revised from 70 billion euros (85. 5 billion dollars) to 48 billion euros per year  between now and 2020.  Stepping up the effort to reach a 30 percent target  would cost 88 billion euros per year -- 11 billion euros more than the EU had  originally earmarked for the 20 percent reduction blueprint. Despite a prognosis by scientists on the United Nations intergovernmental  panel on climate chance (IPCC) that the 20 percent target will not be  sufficient to prevent a catastrophic increase in the earth's temperatures, the  Union has so far balked at accepting a target for higher emission cuts.  One of  the main reasons for its refusal has been that lobbyists for energy-intensive  industries such as cement, aluminium, steel and chemicals have warned they  would leave the EU and relocate to countries with laxer environmental  standards. The warnings have been at odds with the findings of academic studies.  In  2008, the research institute Climate Strategies stated that factors such as  currency exchange rates, access to raw materials, workforce education and  transport infrastructure are more likely to determine where a company will  locate than climate policies. Asked if she regarded the fears expressed by some industries as  exaggerated, Connie Hedegaard, the European commissioner for climate  action, told IPS: 'I understand that the CEO (chief executive officer) of an  industry has one thing on his mind right now: where does money come from?  I think Europe should also consider the risk of losing jobs if we are too  ambitious.  But there is also a price to pay if we stand still. 'Hedegaard, a Danish politician who chaired many of the international climate  change talks in Copenhagen last year, lamented how Europe is falling behind  in promoting technologies designed to reduce its reliance on coal, oil and  gas. While more than 60 percent of the new electricity generating capacity in the  EU last year derived from renewable sources, she argued that Europe's 'lead  is challenged', particularly by Asia.  Firms from China and India are now  among the top ten producers of wind turbines.  And most of the photovoltaic  panels used for solar energy are now made in China and Taiwan. Christian Kjaer from the European Wind Energy Association said that  renewables present huge employment opportunities.  Over 190,000 people  already work in wind energy generation in Europe.  He argued that the  unwillingness of world leaders to thrash out a robust agreement in  Copenhagen last December should not deter the EU from intensifying its  emission reduction efforts.  'Europe is a world leader in wind energy but faces  serious competition from China, the U. S. , Japan, South Korea and India,' he  said. 'I would hate to see Europe losing out because it was lulled into a false sense  of security due to the failure of the climate negotiations. 'Friends of the Earth urged the EU to set a higher reduction goal of 40 percent  by 2020, suggesting that this would be a minimum acceptable goal if the  Union is to help prevent the earth's temperature rising by two degrees  Celsius above pre-industrial levels.  The campaign group is calling for that  target to be legally binding and for penalties to be introduced against states  that do not honour their obligations. 'A 40 percent reduction target is not only possible but affordable and  necessary,' said the group's climate specialist David Heller.  'The EU's  governments must stand up to vested interests and make a clear call for an  increase in EU targets. 'Anti-poverty advocates cited predictions that a two degrees Celsius rise in  global temperatures would drive 250 million people in poor countries from  their homes, cause an additional 30 million to go hungry, and deprive up to 3  billion of adequate access to water.  'For every year we continue to rely on  fossil fuels, we reduce the ability of poor countries to develop,' said Rob van  Drimmelen from Aprodev, a Brussels-based group linked to Protestant  churches.  'Early action to decarbonise Europe's economy is not only the smart  thing to do, it is also a moral imperative. '  