Two weeks ago, a day after the government of Iceland fell, outgoing fisheries  and agriculture minister Einar K.  Gudfinnsson announced a quota for commercial  whaling for up to 150 fin whales and 100 minke whales for the next five years. Setting a catch limit for five years is common practice under the guidelines of  the International Whaling Commission. Gudfinnsson's decision was an answer to full-page advertisements by  whaling interests in two national papers.  A few days after the decision, the  same people advertised to thank him, saying that whaling would provide up  to 300 jobs.  With unemployment rising rapidly in Iceland, this figure was  supposed to provide some form of rationale for the decision.  Iceland has a  population of just over 300,000. There were, however, several snags in the whaling announcement.  Most  importantly, it is doubtful Gudfinsson had the authority to make such a  decision after the government had fallen. Iceland's temporary new government, formed Feb.  1 by the Social Democratic  Alliance (SDA) and the Left-Green Party (LGP), is against the move, and says it  will revoke it.   But that too may not be easy.  The minority government, in place until  elections due Apr.  25, needs the support of the Progressive Party (PP) in the  Althingi (Parliament).  But new chair of the PP Sigmundur D.  Gunnlaugsson  has said his party members may not want a reversal of Gudfinnsson's  decision. The Iceland Nature Conservation Association (INCA) has produced a set of 15  questions for MPs to consider.  Issues raised include the cost of sending whale  meat to Japan, net revenue, and whether this can pay the wages of 200-300  whalers.  Revocation of the decision could lead to claims of damages from the state.   But Atli Gislason, Left-Green MP and lawyer, told IPS: 'The new Prime  Minister, (SDA) Johanna Sigurdardottir, immediately described the decision of  the then fisheries minister as illegal.  The decision should have been laid  before the cabinet where more than one person has authority. 'He added: 'These are all issues that may mean that whalers cannot have  justifiable expectations and apply for damages.  What must also be looked at  is whether they will have suffered damages if the decision is revoked.  They  must prove this, which could prove particularly difficult for them. ' New fisheries minister (Left-Green) Steingrimur J.  Sigfusson announced on his  first day in office that his first task will be to discuss his predecessor's  controversial decision with officials in the ministry, in the hope of getting it  overturned.   At a meeting held last week in the fishing town Akranes, where facilities for  processing whale meat would be set up, Sigfusson was besieged by locals  and trade union representatives saying that whaling would create jobs in the  town that they cannot afford to be without. But Sigfusson was resolute, saying he would weigh advantages and  disadvantages for the whaling and the tourist industry.  He expects to take a  call by next week.  Whale-watching enterprises and the Icelandic Travel Industry Association  have opposed the whaling move.  Criticism has come from overseas as well.  Sinikka Bohlin, Swedish MP and  president of the Nordic Council, was in Iceland for meetings at the time the  decision was announced.  In a press release, she said: 'Hunting whales is  controversial both in the Nordic countries and around the world.  It is  unfortunate that the Icelandic government has chosen to sign such a  controversial agreement in the midst of the current financial and  governmental crisis.  This type of issue should not be raised during a time of  such political chaos. ' The SDA wants Iceland to move towards EU membership.  But since the EU  holds an anti-whaling position, commercial whaling will prove an obstacle  should Iceland want to join the Union.   If whaling goes ahead, the first whales will not be caught until May. In an article in the newspaper Frettabladid, whalers Kristjan Loftsson and  Gunnar B.  Jonsson said they were pleased with a quota for five years because  it would ensure proper marketing of Icelandic whale meat in Japan.  'It always  works better if people know the product will keep coming,' Loftsson told IPS.   