Ten years after an Indonesian agriculturist discovered microbes capable of  producing natural fertilisers, farmers attest that they have boosted agricultural  production. Agricultural entrepreneur and researcher Ali Zum Mazhar found 18 species of  microbes in the forests of the Indonesian territory of Kalimantan while doing  his doctoral studies in 2000.  He eventually developed a technology that converts the microbes into liquid  form, which he calls Bio P 2000 Z.  Successful experiments have proved their  capability to increase crop yields by as much as threefold.  Wardi (who goes by one name), head of Tani Sadatani Farmers’ Association in  Serang, West Java, said he harvested 3. 5 tonnes of soybeans per hectare after  using the Bio P 2000 Z in June 2009. 'Before, we only produced less then one ton per hectare,' he was quoted as  saying by a local media organisation called ‘Rukun Tani Sejahtera’ (‘Farmer  Prosperity Forum’), which is run by a network of farmers’ cooperatives in  West Java. Dian (who similarly goes by one name), head of Toba Samosir Farmers’  Association in North Sumatra, said his regular harvest of four tonnes of corn  per hectare increased to nine tonnes in the last harvest after using the Bio P  2000 Z. Mazhar said the microorganisms collectively produce natural fertiliser.  They  have been successfully tested on sandy lands and former mining sites in  Indonesia that had been rendered unsuitable for agriculture use.  These  include a mining area in Kalimantan, which, according to Mazhar, was  restored to full recovery after three years of infertility.   'What is unique with this natural fertiliser is that the microbes will develop  themselves in the soil but will die naturally' when they have served their  purpose, said Mazhar.  'So it is safe for human and the environment,' he  added.  Five years after his discovery, Mazhar developed a technology called bio- perforation, which transforms the microbes into a liquid substance.  Mazhar said Bio P 2000 Z stands for Bio for ‘biological’, P for ‘perforation’,  2000 for the year he discovered the microbes, and Z for Zum, his middle  name. The following year he secured a patent for his technology and the liquefied  microbes from the World Intellectual Property Organization, a specialised  agency under the United Nations. Mazhar explained that when released into the soil, the microbes work  together to produce fertiliser using available soil nutrients such as carbon,  hydrogen, oxygen, nitrogen, phosphorus, potassium, calcium, magnesium,  sulphur and zinc, thus 'bringing the (infertile) environment to life. 'The agricultural mentor to village farmers in Kalimantan and West Java said  anyone could adopt the technology he developed to produce fertiliser out of  the microbes he has discovered.  'It is a simple and user-friendly technology,'  he said.  In March, bio-perforation was introduced in the Middle East, said Mazhar.  Nabil Kurashi, who teaches Community Medicine at the King Faisal University  in Saudi Arabia, learned about Mazhar’s discovery and the ensuing  technology during his visit to Indonesia last year.  Mazhar recounted that  Kurashi saw for himself how his innovation worked in the South-east Asian  country’s sandy soils.  The latter then decided to introduce the technology to  his country on his return. Mazhar, who has since been hired as an agricultural consultant by King Faisal  University, is now working on a 300-hectare desert land in Jeddah, the  commercial capital of Saudi Arabia, and 20 hectares in Bahrain, using the  technology he developed.  The Indonesian agriculturist said it takes around six months to convert  deserts into farming areas.  'So by the end of the year, we’ll see various trees  and plantations growing there,' he told IPS. Mazhar explained that the liquefied microorganisms work on sandy lands or  deserts by taking minerals from the sand and energy from sunlight.  In the  morning, the microbes absorb water from the mists.  Through  photosynthesis, this process produces organic materials.  With sands  functioning as non-organic medium, the organic matter produces natural  fertilisers that bring life to the deserts. According to Edhie Sandra, senior lecturer at Bogor Agricultural University in  West Java, the process is actually simple: 'We have various kinds of microbes,  some of them have superb capability.  While they produce hormones and  enzymes, they can also break down inorganic matter into organic ones,' he  said.  'Some microbes can also survive in extreme environments. 'He added that such microbes could take energy, minerals from sands and  water from the air for their survival.  They can also be reproduced and cloned  using various techniques.   Fachrudin Mangunjaya, an executive at the Indonesia office of New York- based Conservation International, said Mazhar’s discovery would also make  forest recovery easier.  'In the near future, we can restore wide areas of  damaged forests more efficiently in (terms of) cost and time,' he said. But while Bio P 2000 Z has proved effective as natural fertiliser, making it  affordable to farmers remains a concern.  'For many of them, Bio P 2000 Z is still hardly affordable,' said Ir.  Lystianto,  head of the non-governmental Farmer Association for Technology  Innovation. At present, Bio P 2000 Z sells for 90,000 Indonesian rupiah (about 9. 72 U. S.   dollars) per litre, three times higher than the subsidised price of traditional  fertilisers. 'At such a price, farmer would be more inclined to use the more affordable  and government-subsidised inorganic fertiliser,' Listyanto told IPS. 