When a super cyclone devastated the coastal districts of Orissa state in 1999,  the government pledged to regenerate 3,000 hectares of mangrove.  Or so  forest official Chandra Sekhar Kar thought. 'Where are the regenerated forests?' he asks as he scans the vast swath of  land comprising the 672-square-kilometre Bhitarkanika Wildlife Sanctuary  run by the state’s forest and environment department. Mangrove forests — which include trees, shrubs, ferns and palms — have been  severely depleted, he notes, having given way to villages and hamlets, 80 of  them located right beside what remains of the forests.  Some 240,000 people  are found living inside the Bhitarkanika sanctuary, says Kar, a senior  researcher at the forest department. The Bhitarkanika sanctuary is the smallest of four major contiguous  mangrove forests in India.  Yet, it is the richest in terms of biodiversity,  according to environmental studies conducted by the forest department and  similar institutions in India.  Its habitats range from tidal rivers and creek  networks to riverine islands, coastal wetlands and inter-tidal zones.  Of the 58 mangrove species — out of 70 found worldwide — that are available  in India, 55 are found in Orissa, the bulk of which is in Bhitarkanika,  according to the forest department.  The eastern state’s floral biodiversity is  the second largest in the world after Papua New Guinea.  Experts say the mangroves in Orissa, particularly in the Bhitarkanika area,  have been under heavy human pressure as a result of population growth and  a vast range of human activities that serve both domestic and livelihood  needs.   Mangroves provide shelter and serve as breeding grounds for a wide variety  of aquatic species.  As a vital component of coastal ecosystems, they are also  known to provide protection against erosion and other destructive natural  forces.  Their loss can adversely affect marine and terrestrial biodiversity, says  retired zoology professor S. K.  Dutta.   Orissa, located on the east coast of India, accounts for about 5 percent of the  total mangrove forests in India, estimated at 4,639 sq km, according to  India’s ‘State of Forests’ report of 2009. At Hatiaganda village near the Bhitarkanika sanctuary, where mangroves are  still relatively denser, Sushanta Maiti, 25, a resident, says, 'people still collect  wood from the mangrove forests,' unmindful of the law restricting this  practice.   'Each household uses 14 kilograms of firewood daily for cooking, of which 12  kg come from mangroves,' says Chandra Sekhar Kar.   The forest guards, Maiti alleges, take 5 to 10 rupees (about 10 to 20 U. S.   cents) in bribe payments from unscrupulous villagers and let them get away  with their illegal acts.   'Communities use 51 species for traditional and medicinal purposes,' says  Sudhakar Kar, another senior researcher with the forest department.   Moreover, timber and fronds found in mangroves are used for construction  purposes while fisher folk make boats, rafters and paddles from suitable  mangrove tree species, he explains.   Based on the latest mangrove mapping conducted by India’s National Remote  Sensing Agency in 2004, agriculture accounted for 52 percent of the  Bhitarkanika sanctuary, leaving only 22 percent of dense mangrove cover  while some of the remaining areas have been used for human habitation. Another major threat to mangroves are grazing cattle, numbering at least a  hundred thousand in the 80 villages near the Bhitarkanika sanctuary, says  Chandra Sekhar Kar. In 1971, hordes of illegal immigrants from the then newly formed Bangladesh  started coming to Orissa, where they cleared massive areas of mangroves  along the entire east coast for farming, environmentalist Biswajit Mohanty  recounts to IPS.  'They built embankments that choke off the tidal waters,  mangroves’ lifeline,' he says. In 2005, the state government served deportation notices on some 1,500  Bangladesh nationals that had illegally settled in India.  The opposition  political parties raised a furore, arguing that the immigrants should be  treated as refugees instead.  Such notices were never served again on  Bangladeshis occupying areas planted with mangroves.  'Immigrants or nationals, there is no law restricting people from settling  inside the sanctuary.  There has to be one,' says forestry expert Chandra  Sekhar Kar.  Then by the early 90s, 'the global shrimp export turned hugely lucrative,'  says Mohanty.  'Sheltered creekside mangrove forests, mudflats, even  agriculture fields were converted into illegal brackish water prawn culture  ponds indirectly funded by non-local shrimp traders. '  'After the crackdown on shrimp ponds built on government land, private  lands are now being bought for the purpose and there exists no law  restricting this,' says Bibhas Pandav, a scientist with the Wildlife Institute of  India.  Selected areas within the sanctuary are still in the name of their  original inhabitants. 'Unless we have a law against land use conversion inside the Bhittarkanika  sanctuary, it will be impossible to check species extinction,' says Kar.    'People simply do not want mangrove regeneration in the land they have  cleared for income generation,' he adds. According to the Red List of Threatened Species — an inventory of the global  conservation status of plant and animal species — released last month by the  International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN), one in six mangrove  species worldwide is facing extinction due to coastal development,  aquaculture, logging, agriculture and climate change.  India, alongside South-east Asia, has lost 80 percent of all mangrove areas  over the past 60 years, states IUCN. 