The resources society derives from nature have been horribly  mismanaged and this will lead to the children of the world's  poorest people remaining in poverty, according to Paul  Collier.  The easiest of these resources to regulate is fish,  but we have not even managed to get that right, he said. The Oxford professor and development expert spoke Tuesday in  Washington about his new book, 'The Plundered Planet: Why We  Must - and How We Can - Manage Nature for Global  Prosperity'. One of its chapters discusses the failure of governments to  effectively regulate fishing industries - which he says is a  microcosm of the missteps we have taken in the management of  natural resources. 'If you unleash that [modern fishing] technology with no  limit there will be no more fish,' Collier said.  He  explained the beneficial role of regulation, namely 'rents'  that make fish more expensive than it costs to catch them. But the proceeds of those rents have been misdirected, going  right back to the fishermen and allowing them to increase  their capacity for catching fish even further - thus leading  to the ever-increasing plunder of fish stocks. The same is true with other resources, he contends - such as  forests, oil and minerals. Collier says these resources and the revenue they generate  should be conserved for future generations, but that corrupt  governance and the question of ownership of transnational  resources all too often makes this politically impossible. Of these transnational natural resources, he thinks fish  stocks should be the easiest to regulate effectively,  largely because the fishing industry is not nearly as large  and powerful as others, like the fossil fuel industry. 'If we can't get fish right, what hope is there for larger  industries' that have far more revenue and thus far more  lobbying power and clout with policymakers, he said.  They  will simply be 'lobbying for continued plunder'. As in his previous book, 'The Bottom Billion', where Collier  sought to find practical ways to bring the poorest sixth of  humanity out of poverty, 'The Plundered Planet' presents  several practical ways to ensure future generations are not  condemned to poverty - or to empty seas. Tuesday, he cited Kuwait as an alternative to the plunder  now, pay later model.  He noted how the oil-rich the country  sets aside some revenue from its oil reserves in a trust  fund earmarked for future generations. Of course, not all countries would be willing to take those  measures in the name of future generations.  It is up to  citizens, then, to keep an eye on their governments and call  for the responsible use of resources, Collier said. Thus, the very thing that allows the excessive plunder of  resources like fish in the first place - technology - can be  used to reverse it.  He believes that informed societies will  make better decisions and that when it comes to informing  people 'technology is on our side' in getting accurate  information out there and making sure it reaches as many  people as quickly as possible. Fish stocks: A plundered case in pointIn the case of fish stocks, the clock is ticking. Rents are crucial to knocking up the price of a resource  that would otherwise be decimated, but despite these rents  fish stocks are widely decimated anyway.  The problem, says  Collier, is what happens to the proceeds from these rents. He contends they should go to the international community,  seeing as most major fish stocks cross national borders -  maybe to help fund the World Food Programme.  But the money  actually ends up back on the fishing boats. The global fishing industry is worth about 85 billion  dollars a year.  Collier estimates that at least 20 billion  of that is rents.  Globally, however, there are about 27  billion dollars in subsidies going to the fishermen each  year, according to a U. N.  Environment Programme report  released May 17 - even more than the amount of rents taken  in. That money, contends Collier, is going toward further  expanding the already overly large fishing fleets.  Indeed, past studies have estimated that the capacity of the  global fishing industry to catch fish is twice as large as  is actually needed.  This has led to massively depleted seas  - to the tune of almost 30 percent of fish stocks now deemed  'collapsed', or yielding less than 10 percent of their  former ability, according to the May UNEP report. Subsidies are known to exacerbate that — even when direct  subsidies are eliminated, indirect ones like fuel discounts,  persist.  A study commissioned by the Pew Environment Group  in March traced the effect of subsidies allotted to EU  fisheries between 2006 and 2009.  It found 29 percent funded  measures that would amp up fishing while just 17 percent  went to measures known to support sustainable fisheries —  the original intent of the funding. The European Commission said last April that 88 percent of  EU fish stocks are overfished. UNEP identifies just eight billion dollars of the 27 billion  dollars of global subsidies as 'good'.  The remainder  contributes to the over-exploitation of fish stocks. It recommends taking 13 to 20 million boats out of the water  and redirecting a portion of those subsidy dollars - eight  billion - to retraining up to 22 million fishers for other  work. In Collier's words, when it comes to fish - the primary  source of protein for almost one billion people - 'It's very  stark that we are misregulating.  We're failing to regulate. 'The global policy on fish is massively failing, he said.   'We're not even making rich fishermen. 'His point may be catching on.  In releasing the report, UNEP  Executive Director Achim Steiner echoed Collier's points on  plunder and mismanagement. 'Fisheries across the world are being plundered, or  exploited at unsustainable rates.  It is a failure of  management of what will prove to be monumental proportions  unless addressed,' Steiner said. 