An agreement reached at an international conference last week  pledged over four billion dollars to the U. N. 's effort to  reduce the greenhouse gas emissions that come from  deforestation and forest degradation.  But a study published  Friday questions what impact that effort, called REDD, can  have. The study, in Friday's issue of the journal Science, finds  the carbon emissions eliminated through reducing the  deforestation of some Amazonian forests may be partially  cancelled out by the fact that fires have increased in those  forests. 'The results were a surprise because we expected that fires  would decrease with the decrease of deforestation following  the implementation of REDD,' said Luiz Aragão, an  environmental scientist at the University of Exeter and lead  author of the study.  'But the correct hypothesis was…that  fire increased even with the decrease of deforestation. 'By analysing satellite data on deforestation and fires in  the Brazilian Amazon, the authors showed that nearly two- thirds of the land with reduced deforestation has  experienced an increase in the rates at which fires occur. This is widely due to farmers' continued reliance on the  slash-and-burn method of clearing land, which even when it  does not burn forests directly can leak into bordering  forest areas or be targeted at the undergrowth of those  forests so that farmers can grow crops under the trees'  canopy. This burning of forest regrowth is releasing the carbon  stored in the vegetation into the atmosphere, but, the study  says, it is not accounted for by Brazil's deforestation  monitoring system.  Another factor is that hotter temperatures are gradually  drying out the rainforest, which would typically be too  humid and wet to sustain fires.  The study, in fact, was  'motivated by the fact that several global circulation  models show that the Amazon will get drier in the 21st  century, making it a fire-prone system,' said Aragão. Left unburned — and unforested — trees and undergrowth have  exactly the opposite effect as they do when burning or  rotting: they absorb the carbon in the atmosphere, thus  acting as a powerful force against climate change. Encouraging people and companies to leave these 'carbon  sinks' standing was the main justification for the REDD  programme, in which funding from industrial countries goes  to reducing deforestation activities in developing  countries. REDD got a large boost last week when a conference on  climate and forests in Oslo concluded with Australia,  France, Germany, Japan, Norway, the U. K.  and the U. S.   agreeing to finance the programme with a combined four  billion dollars.  One billion of that is a deal by which  Norway will pay Indonesia to leave some of its rainforests  standing. Scaling back the rapid deforestation of its vast rainforests  is key to Indonesia's goal of reducing its greenhouse gas  emissions by 26 percent by 2020, compared to the potential  level at which they would be without emissions reduction  action.  But concerns have been raised in the past several  months that the country would simply reforest former  rainforest land with commercial oil palm and timber  plantations. Monday, though, Indonesian President Susilo Bambang  Yudhoyono said his country would, under the agreement with  Norway, revoke forestry licenses owned by palm oil and  timber firms and suspend the issuing of new concessions for  two years.  Reports say that suspension will not come into  effect until 2011. REDD and its offshoot, REDD Plus, which includes measures to  encourage reforestation, have been coming under significant  criticism for years. One main criticism stems from the fact that it rewards  logging companies for not logging on portions of their land  but offers no reward to those — like indigenous communities  — that have always preserved their rainforests and the  carbon-absorbing capabilities those forests happen to have.   Indeed, indigenous groups regularly criticise REDD for  encouraging the perception that forests are simply carbon  sinks to be used to offset the polluting activities of firms  in industrial countries. Studies by NGOs like Greenpeace have found that halting the  deforestation on a given patch of land sometimes just means  the logging company moves a few acres over to log somewhere  else.  This 'leakage' means that the polluting activities the  trees were meant to offset are, in fact, not offset by  anything and the concentration of greenhouse gases in the  atmosphere continues to rise. Now, the Science study says the same phenomenon is occurring  when REDD fails to address the land management practices on  the areas around preserved forests.  Slash and burn of  undergrowth or burning that leaks into the bordering forests  releases greenhouse gases that REDD was meant to keep the  vegetation absorbing. But, in this case, at least a possible solution exists. The study found land management that did not use fires  reduced the incidence of fire on forested land by as much as  69 percent. Aragão therefore says there should be a 'shift from slash  and burn to more sustainable land management'. 'The implications for REDD are that, first, we need a  monitoring system that can monitor the fire and also can  monitor the secondary forests that are being deforested  under these areas…that are not monitored by the Brazilian  deforestation system,' he said.  'And the second one is that  there is a need to shift the land usage in the Amazon from  the conventional [slash-and-burn] way to a more managed way  where fire is not used. 'Left unaddressed, however, increasing fire frequency 'could  jeopardise the benefits' from REDD, and, concludes the  paper, 'the carbon savings achieved by avoiding  deforestation may be partially negated'. 