Europe seems hell-bent on burning the world's forests for  bioenergy, even as it offers billions of euros to save them,  critics say. The dirty secret of Europe's vaunted green energy revolution  is the fact that 68. 5 percent of its renewable energy  portfolio comes from biofuels and burning wood for energy,  according to a report released in Brussels last week.  Modern  technologies like wind and solar get all the press, but  burning wood is well, prehistoric. 'We estimate at least 27 million tonnes of wood biomass will  be needed annually to supply planned power stations in the  UK (United Kingdom) alone,' said Almuth Ernsting from  Biofuelwatch, a British NGO focused on bioenergy issues. In a story broken by IPS last fall, at least one million  hectares of forest annually will be needed to feed the  dozens of planned wood-fired power plants in Britain alone.   The Netherlands is already burning one million tonnes of  wood.  Germany is up 23 million cubic meters (16. 5 million  tonnes) - mostly imported - and plans to double this figure  by 2020, said the report, 'Wood Based Bioenergy: The Green  Lie'. 'It's getting pretty scary,' Ernsting, a report co-author,  told IPS. There is already a huge problem of deforestation without  bioenergy, said Anne Petermann, executive director of the  Global Justice Ecology Project, an international  environmental NGO based in the U. S.  Deforestation has long been a dangerously intractable  problem, eating up 13 to 16 million hectares every year and  responsible for 20 percent of the global warming emissions  that are destabilising the climate. 'Current deforestation is having serious impacts on forests  and forest peoples around the world,' Petermann said in a  phone interview. The centrepiece of Europe's climate-change reduction  strategy is the production of 20 percent of its energy from  renewable sources by 2020.  That objective has become a  classic 'good idea gone wrong', said Petermann.  She was in  Brussels to tell members of the European Parliament their  policies are killing forests and hurting indigenous and  local forest peoples. 'We have an enormous deforestation problem already, there is  no way massive increases in wood to feed bioenergy furnaces  could ever be sustainable,' she said. It turns out not many of members of the European Parliament  were interested in learning about that, or the fact that  particulate emissions from wood-burning are worse than coal,  putting public health at risk.  In the U. S.  scientists, have  been warning about the health risks posed from biomass  burning since these emit more fine particulates than coal.   These invisible particles can damage lungs and make asthma  worse, Petermann said. Nor did European legislators really want to know the truth  about the 'big lie' that burning wood for energy is carbon- neutral, she said. The assumption underlying the shift from burning coal to  burning wood is that while burning wood results in CO2  emissions, trees can be planted to absorb those emissions as  they grow.  The simple metric is this: burn a million  hectares a year, plant a million hectares a year and voila -  clean, green carbon-neutral energy. Of course, a tree doesn't grow as fast as it burns.  So it  will be 20 years, maybe 15 years for some special fast-grow  genetically-engineered species being readied, before the  carbon is absorbed.  All assuming the replacement tree gets  enough water, doesn't get a disease and avoids insects and  forest fires. Then there is all the energy and emissions involved in  cutting, processing and shipping wood many thousands of  kilometres from Africa, South America and Canada.  So plant a  few more trees to make up the difference, which incidentally  could also be done to offset emissions from coal. 'There is no data proving wood biomass energy is carbon  neutral,' said Ernsting. Even if wood biomass energy was net-carbon neutral, there is  the long lag time it takes to achieve neutrality.  An  inconvenient but fundamental climate science recommendation  has been that global emissions need to peak before 2020.   Burning wood for energy is little better than coal in that  regard, said Petermann. However, that CO2-peak-before-2020 warning from climate  scientists, including the authoritative Intergovernmental  Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), is now being completely  ignored as politically unrealistic.  Instead, policy makers  have widely adopted the notion that it is okay if CO2  concentrations go dangerously higher for a decade or two  because not only will there be big emissions reductions in  the future, we will be able to pull down CO2 levels from  what's already up there. That is a failure to understand some basic science, experts  say.  CO2 emissions today will warm the atmosphere for the  next 100 years.  But even worse is the problem of tipping  points.  If the global temperature rises above two degrees C,  scientists believe it is almost certain the Arctic sea ice  will be gone in the summer, leading to the melting of large  regions of permafrost - which releases more CO2, and  especially methane, a far more potent greenhouse gas. There would be no pulling back from this and other feedback  loops like the melt of the Greenland ice sheet or glaciers  in the Himalayas. 'Wood biomass energy is twice as crazy an idea as maize  ethanol was,' said Helena Paul of EcoNexus, a public  interest research organisation and science watchdog based in  Oxford, England. Heavily subsidised maize (corn) based ethanol production in  the U. S.  drove up food prices worldwide, and increased water  pollution and fertiliser use in the U. S.  with little, if  any, reductions in greenhouse gas emissions by most  analyses.  Many of the same corporate interests -  agribusiness, biotech, energy - are investing and convincing  governments to subsidise wood bioenergy, Paul told IPS from  the resumed climate negotiations in Bonn, Germany last week. Subsidies in Britain paid as Renewable Obligation  Certificates will cost taxpayers about three billion dollars  a year for the biomass power plants currently under  construction or planned, reports Robert Palgrave of  Biofuelwatch. 'Where is all the spare land to grow all those trees?' Paul  asked. A recent analysis published in the journal Science has  bioenergy lands covering half of the planet's arable lands  by 2065. 'The potential for disaster is absolutely enormous if this  takes off in Europe and America,' Paul said. 