In mid-April this year, MV Malavika, a cargo ship of the Essar Shipping  Corporation, a major sea logistics firm in India, leaked an estimated eight tonnes  of furnace oil after being struck by a barge near the Gopalpur port on the  eastern Indian coast of Orissa. Within a few hours, a huge slick had washed up along the Olive Ridley Turtle  nesting beach at Rushikulya, a major turtle nesting site in Orissa, where over  150,000 turtles had nested just a few weeks earlier.  The fear of the impact  this would have on the turtle nests was confirmed about a month later.  In spite of claims by authorities that the beach had been cleaned up, local  researchers say that more than half the eggs laid could have been damaged  by the oil.  'This is the first time we’ve experienced a slick of this kind, and the damage  has been immense,' says Rabindranath Sahu, the secretary of Rushikulya Sea  Turtle Protection Committee, of the oil spill in Orissa.  Only about three  kilometres of the beach had been cleaned up whereas the turtle nesting had  occurred along a five km stretch, he tells IPS.  The livelihoods of nearly 10 fishing villages in the area had been completely  destroyed as the fish catch had collapsed while salt production units in the  area had to shut operations for about 20 days, he adds. This environmental disaster in Orissa is perhaps no match to the damage that  has been inflicted on the Gulf of Mexico in the United States, where  thousands of barrels of oil have been leaking out every day from British  Petroleum’s oil rig for nearly two months now, following the rig’s explosion. A rich coastline has been laid waste, hundreds of birds have been found  dripping with the oily residue, sea turtle mortality has been significant and a  fishing and shrimp industry has been crippled, if not completely destroyed,  according to media reports.   'This is where the precautionary principle comes in,' says Greenpeace India’s  Ocean Campaigns manager Sanjiv Gopal.  'Off-shore installations should be  kept out of critical marine ecosystems and from the migratory, breeding and  spawning habitats of commercial fish and other species,' he says.  'From the experience in Orissa, we also feel that no new ports or port  expansion projects should be allowed within 25 km of ecologically sensitive  areas. 'The economic value of coastal and marine environments is enough to justify  the need for their sustainable use and management. According to the ‘Global Diversity Outlook 3’ (GDO3), a report released in May  2010 by the Convention on Biological Diversity, coral reefs, for instance, are  estimated to provide services worth 18 million U. S.  dollars per square km a  year for natural hazard management, up to 100 million dollars for tourism,  more than five million dollars for genetic material and bioprospecting, and  more than 300,000 dollars for fisheries.   'The world’s &#64257;sheries,' states the report, 'employ approximately 200 million  people, provide about 16 percent of the protein consumed worldwide and  have a value estimated at US$82 billion. ' Yet, about 80 percent of the world’s  fish stocks are overexploited or have been fully exploited. Coral reefs cover a miniscule portion of the world’s continental shelf and yet,  as GDO3 notes, up to a billion people depend on them for food and nearly  300 million for basic livelihood support. Research reveals that coral reefs are coming under increasing stress from a  range of damaging human activities: overfishing, pollution from land based  sources, reef dynamiting for fishing, coral bleaching due to temperature rises  and ocean acidification on account of global warming.  Scientists at the Phuket Marine Biological Center in Thailand noted in early  May that coral bleaching in this South-east Asian country was the worst in  Thai waters in the last two decades.  A similar situation has been confirmed in  the adjoining Andaman and Nicobar islands in India.  	A Jun.  4 report released by Reuters news agency listed 20 of the most  significant oil spills around the globe.  'The spill (Gulf of Mexico) stands out,'  it said, 'for its proximity to U. S.  shores and the publicity it has generated by  comparison with other large, ongoing leaks in more remote parts of the  world. 'Dr Jack Frazier, a noted turtle biologist and member of the International Sea  Turtle Society, agrees: 'This sort of problem has been occurring regularly in  other parts of the world, with hardly a murmur on the daily news. ' He asks:  'How many people, for instance, have even voiced concern about the decade- long disaster in Nigeria?'The Ibeno beach, for example, in the coastal state of Akwa Ibom in Nigeria  has seen a series of serious oil spills since December 2009.  Its coastline has  been devastated by oil leaks from offshore operations, and fishing activities  have been seriously impacted.  Says Oluseun Onigbide, director of Media and Advocacy at Green Acts, an  environmental group based in Lagos, the former capital of Nigeria: 'The Ibeno  oil spill is a clear example of how the pursuit of economic growth destroys  the work of nature, impacts livelihoods and compromises people’s health. ''The recent developments are indicative of the fact that we have failed to  regulate sea and land based activities that can damage the fragile marine  ecosystem,' says Chandrika Sharma, secretary of the India-based  International Collective in Support of Fishworkers, a non-governmental  organisation advocating the rights small-scale artisanal fisherfolk. 