A radical, underground movement is growing in the suburbs of  the United States. From coast to coast, eco-concerned homeowners are ripping  out their manicured, chemically-treated lawns and replacing  them with organic food gardens, native flowers and  sometimes, just rocks. 'It's a growing endeavour.  It gets bigger and bigger every  year,' said Steven Saffier, coordinator of the Audubon  Society's At Home programme, which encourages people to let  their lawns go wild to support birds and other wildlife.  The lawn, the one-third acre or more of trimmed grass  outside the front door of so many U. S.  homes, is getting an  eco-makeover as people learn about the lawn's impact on the  larger environment. Groups as diverse as urban garden clubs, environmental  groups and wildlife protection groups are spreading the word  that a big, lush lawn harms biodiversity and is an eco- disaster. 'Lawns contribute to climate change,' Saffier told IPS.  'The  fossil fuels used in fertiliser and pesticide production add  CO2 to the environment. 'Lawns in the U. S.  are grown mostly from non-native grasses  that require large amounts of water, pesticides and  fertilisers.  Many homeowners aim for perfection, considered  a dark green mat of closely-mown grass without weeds, a look  promoted by chemical and fertiliser manufacturers here. But homeowners, corporations and schools are starting to  catch on to the idea of creating a wild space where nature  can thrive. Last week, Saffier helped dig a garden with a native spice  bush plant at a Pennsylvania school.  The group had barely  covered the roots of the plant with dirt when a swallowtail  butterfly landed on a leaf and laid her eggs. 'That's the kind of thing we are going for, on a larger  scale,' Saffier said. What happens on individual lawns is multiplied many times  over, because more U. S.  surface area is devoted to lawns  than any other irrigated crop, according to an analysis by  the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA). The Lawn Institute, which represents the 35-billion-dollar  per year turf industry, estimates that 25 million acres of  lawn are growing in the U. S.  This land previously hosted  native trees, shrubs and grasses and entire ecosystems, but  not anymore. 'The nutrient, hydrology and nitrogen cycles that happen  naturally in biodiverse ecosystems are completely absent in  lawns,' Saffier said. These acres of contiguous lawn have contributed to the  severe decline in the U. S.  bird population, Saffier said. 'The lawn is a landscape that offers nothing to the bird,'  he said. Ninety-six percent of birds eat mainly insects, like  caterpillars and bugs, and these insects are highly  specialised and eat just one, two or three types of native  plants. 'The birds won't find insects on the lawn,' Saffier said.   Fewer caterpillars mean birds do not have enough food to  feed their young. Of the 800 major bird species in the U. S. , 200 are in  dangerous decline, Audubon says.  Populations of meadow larks  and other grassland species in the mid-western U. S.  have  plummeted 60 percent, while interior forest birds, like  scarlet tanagers, have also seen a precipitous decline. Shrub land bird species, like the Brown Thrasher and Eastern  Towhee, have decreased 75 percent since 1966, according to  the North American Breeding Bird Survey, of the U. S.   Geological Survey and Environment Canada. Bird populations are doubly harmed when lawns are sprayed  with pesticides and herbicides. 'It only takes a trace amount of chemicals on insects or  plants to impact birds.  Birds have very sensitive nervous  systems,' Saffier said. Of the 30 most common pesticides used on lawns, more than  half are toxic to birds and fish, and linked to cancer and  birth defects in humans, according to the environmental  group, Beyond Pesticides.  Eleven of the 30 are endocrine  disrupters, chemicals that interfere with reproductive and  other hormones in humans and animals. Lawns and gardens are sprayed with more pesticides per acre  than farmland, with weed killer the most used yard chemical,  at 90 million pounds per year.  About 78 million U. S.   households spray pesticides on their yards each year,  according to Beyond Pesticides.  Lawn grasses tend to shed rainwater, so the chemicals run  off into surface and groundwater after a downpour,  increasing the chance that animals as well as humans will be  exposed to them, John Kepner, project director of Beyond  Pesticides, told IPS. 'Children are the most vulnerable,' he said. Lawns were originally a flagrant display of European wealth,  a sign that a household was rich enough to devote land to  grass rather than food. They remain a status symbol today, says Julian Agyeman,  chair of Urban and Environmental Policy and Planning at  Tufts University.  'The paradigm is that you should have a lawn at any cost,  even if you can't afford it,' Agyeman told IPS. Millions of U. S.  poor can't afford homes and lawns - and  sometimes not even enough food - and are hired, often at low  wages, to mow and spray chemicals on the lawns of the  wealthy.  'Adding insult to injury, the poor can't afford a lawn and  then end up caring for the lawns of those that can,' Agyeman  said. Food Not Lawns, a group with chapters in many U. S.   communities, works with people who are ready to completely  let go of the lawn as status symbol. 'We call it lawn eradification,' Steve Mann, co-founder of  Food Not Lawns Kansas City, Missouri, told IPS. Instead of turf, people are encouraged to grow fruit and nut  trees, like pecans, walnuts and almonds, as well as  vegetables.  Since 2007, 250 people have consulted with the  group. The group is seeking zoning changes from the city so  neighbours can sell their extra garden produce, and hire  others to help them.  They've encountered surprising  opposition from local realtors. 'Just think, you could pick up some fresh lettuce and  tomatoes for your dinner right down the street.  What's wrong  with that?' Mann said. The opportunity for gardens in Kansas City is endless, given  the amount of lawn space.  'My god, people here have acres of  it,' Mann said. Penny Lewis, executive director of the Ecological  Landscaping Association, a group of professionals and  homeowners, told IPS the lawn paradigm must change. 'Rather than the status symbol being the picture-perfect  lawn, it becomes the eco-friendly lawn,' she said.  *This story is part of a series of features on biodiversity  by Inter Press Service (IPS), CGIAR/Biodiversity  International, International Federation of Environmental  Journalists (IFEJ), and the United Nations Environment  Programme/Convention on Biological Diversity (UNEP/CBD) --  all members of the Alliance of Communicators for Sustainable  Development (www. complusalliance. org). 