The Maldives Islands, fast gaining a reputation for ‘walking the talk’ as it raises  its tiny island voice in the climate change discourse, has launched an action plan  to phase out hydrochlorofluorocarbons (HCFCs) by 2020, or 10 years ahead of  other countries and the target set by an international agreement known as the  Montreal Protocol on Substances that Deplete the Ozone Layer. The government said work has begun on measures needed to effect this  change, which includes bringing in legislation for a course of action that  would reduce, minimise and eventually end the use of greenhouse gases in air  conditioners. The Maldives — an archipelago of more than 1,000 islands in the Indian Ocean  — has also announced that it would be carbon neutral by 2020, again years  ahead of other countries. Minister of Transport, Housing and Environment Mohamed Aslam said some  of the steps being taken to begin the phase-out process includes providing  directions to government agencies and preparing a database on HCFC  equipment. 'We are also targeting small industry and preparing guidelines for  enforcement,' he told reporters here last week.  'All these measures would be  included in a detailed programme of work to ensure targets are met by 2020,'  he said. Industry has confirmed its support for this government initiative.   Representatives of companies, attending a recent conference here on the  phase-out process, said they were working alongside the government in  phasing out the use of HCFCs in air conditioners (ACs).  'Already we have  imported a few HCFC-free ACs, and the response is good,' said one  executive. Used mostly in air conditioners, HCFCs depletes the ozone layer and  contributes to global warming, experts say.  In 2007 the international  community took an important step towards phasing out these refrigerant  gases. President Mohamed Nasheed, who won power in November 2008 and ousted  Maumoom Abdul Gayoom, who ruled over this island nation with an iron fist  for 30 years, is the man behind the Maldives’s success on the world stage as  a campaigner for environmental change — while making that change happen  at home. 'Foreign governments are now listening to me fairly intensely and also inviting  me to speak more often on the environment,' the President told IPS in an  interview at his modest home in this capital.  'Europe is supportive of our  environment efforts, but we have a long way to go with the U. S. 'The Maldives is the first country to receive United Nations funding — a one  million U. S.  dollar grant — under the Montreal Protocol to implement the  phase-out of HCFCs. The lowest country on the planet, with islands just seven feet above water, is  leading the way in climate change, with Nasheed campaigning on behalf of all  small island states, saying this is a 'human rights and a right to live' issue.    'Going green is not only ecologically sound but also economically beneficial. 'Across the Maldives, everyone is clued into global warming and sea level rise.   Fathimah Reema, assistant director at the Environmental Protection Agency,  cited a survey conducted by the agency showed sea erosion topped the list of  public awareness of environmental issues, followed by waste, the ozone  depletion and climate change. 'Regular reporting of these issues by the media has helped make people  aware of these concerns,' she said. Mifzal Ahmed, an advisor on investments at the Ministry of Economic  Development, said the government is promoting only sustainable  development projects.  'The government policy is that that all investments  should be sustainable.  We don’t want someone to come and put up a coal  power plant for example,' he told IPS. 'We want to give a positive message on climate change.  We don’t want to be  all doom and gloom.  We want to say the technology exists to solve these  problems; it’s just a matter of investing in these technologies. 'He said the Maldives wants to showcase these technologies, and any company  can come and invest in these environment-friendly technologies.  'If you want  to make the Maldives your poster chart, by all means do so,' he added. Nasheed, dubbed the ‘rock star’ of climate change, said that during his trip to  Australia earlier this month, he visited the Australian National University,  which has been developing cheaper solar power technology since 1971. 'This university has been preparing a prototype to produce solar power at 10  Australian cents (less than one U. S.  cent) per minute since the energy crisis.   They have finished everything — all the scientific research has been done,' he  said.  'However, no one is touching it because all the money is with coal  producers and fossil fuel companies. 'According to Atul Bagai, regional network coordinator of the U. N.   Environmetal Programme based in Bangkok, Maldives is the first country to  achieve so much out of the 145 countries that have agreed to the HCFC  phase-out programme.  'It shows the efficiency of the government and the public-private  partnerships in industry,' he said, adding that by the time Maldives phases  out its HCFC usage, the other countries would still be using these destructive  gases. 'We can’t go on forever with small steps,' argued Minister Aslam, referring to  his country’s urgency and speed in dealing with climate change and its  adverse effects on the environment. '(The Maldives) is where we have lived for generations and where we will  continue to be.  You can’t think of relocating (to other countries).  No one  wants to leave,' he noted. 