On a spring day in the Gulf of Mexico, a pipe issuing from the  sea floor ruptured, sending an explosion rippling up to the  drilling platform above and spewing oil into the surrounding  waters.  Experts scrambled to seal off the ever-increasing mass  of oil by capping the pipe, clogging it or covering it.   Nothing worked. Work began on the drilling of a relief well.  Oil continued  to gush into the ecologically fragile and economically  critical waters. That was 31 years ago. The 1979 explosion at Pemex's Ixtoc I offshore oil rig was  the worst accidental oil spill in history, releasing an  estimated 140 million gallons of crude oil before the relief  well could plug the leak 290 days after it began. The amount of oil issuing from the well under the BP-owned  Deepwater Horizon rig - relatively young at only 56 days old  - is expected to surpass Ixtoc's record.  Some estimates say  it already has. What effect that oil will ultimately have on the surrounding  environment and communities is far from clear, but the Ixtoc  spill is certainly the most logical place to look for  answers.  Unfortunately, strikingly few studies were done in  the wake of that catastrophe. One, titled 'Impacto ecológico de la industria petrolera en  la Sonda de Campeche, México, tras tres décadas de  actividad' (Ecological Impact of the Oil Industry in the Bay  of Campeche, Mexico, After Three Decades) found that the  most persistent issues were pollution of estuaries and  coastal lagoons lining the bay, and especially the effects  on breeding and growth of several food fish species. Wes Tunnell, a biologist at the Harte Research Institute for  Gulf of Mexico Studies based at Texas A&M University in  Corpus Christi, has been studying the impacts of the Ixtoc  spill since even before it took place. He has studied the southern Gulf of Mexico and the Bay of  Campeche - where the Ixtoc I rig was located - for about 45  years, including regular visits to certain spill-impacted  localities in the 30 years since 1979. But even he admits, 'It's pretty baffling for most of us who  studied that spill to know what happened to that oil and  where it all went. 'He does know a few things about its impact, though. The blowout that led to the spill occurred on Jun.  3.   Currents eventually washed the crude oil ashore in the  Mexican states of Campeche, Tabasco, Veracruz and  Tamaulipas.  By the time it reached the south Texas coast in  the first week of August, Tunnell was ready. 'Over the next six weeks it pretty much coated the south  Texas beaches for about 30 miles - a 20- to 30-foot wide  band of oil and tar about a half-an-inch thick to one-foot  thick in some places,' he told IPS in a phone interview. With other researchers, he had taken samples before the oil  got there, in July.  They returned for more studies in  September, after the oil had arrived and 'been stirred up by  some storms'. What they discovered was that two groups of organisms that  'can be found by the thousands per metre squared in the sand  beneath your feet when you're walking along in the surf  zone' - marine worms and amphipods - were reduced by 80  percent in the inter-tidal zone and 50 percent in the sub- tidal zone, though he emphasises that those numbers  represent the averages of lots of different samples. 'So we didn't see a drop in the number of species but a drop  in the number of individuals.  We thought 'Oh, boy, this is  really severe',' Tunnell said. Two and half years after the spill, he got a graduate  student to go do a thesis project on the same Texas beaches.   It was discovered that by then the worm and amphipod numbers  had rebounded. 'So you can probably say that within two to three years the  beach fauna or beach populations were back to where they  were before the spill.  I think that's probably a pretty  standard thing.  Fine-grain, sandy beaches can be cleaned up  pretty easily,' Tunnell explained. He also recalls a colleague who had studied the shrimp  fishery based in Campeche, Mexico - the largest in the  southern gulf - assuming that the fishery 'would be  devastated for years to come' by the oil from Ixtoc. But, he says, 'The second year after the spill the shrimp  populations were back to where they were before the spill,  which is, again, pretty amazing to us. 'Tom Shirley, also of the Harte Institute, has some insights  into why these organisms were able to bounce back so  quickly. The equivalent of an oil tanker seeps into the water from  oil deposits under the sea floor each year, and organisms  have adapted to cope with the constant presence of oil in  the water.  That coping means that the animals in the gulf  have a striking capacity to break down oil molecules,  Shirley said. 'So the gulf, due to these seeps, is more ready to deal with  oil than most anywhere else,' he said.  '[It's] an amazingly  resilient habitat. 'But, he explained, the naturally-occurring seeps happen in a  much more gradual way that is likely much easier for  organisms to manage and cope with than the tens of thousands  of barrels in the water right now. 'As long as oil spills remain out on the open sea, the  effects are relatively limited,' Daniel Lluch-Cota, a  biologist at the state Northwest Biological Research Centre  and one of the four authors of the 2004 study, told IPS.   'The real trouble begins when they reach the shore. 'Remnants of the Ixtoc spill could still be seen and touched  as recently as seven years ago, and Tunnell is setting out  this week to determine whether they are still there today. In the fall of 1979, while he was studying the impact of the  oil washing up in Texas, he sent a couple graduate students  to the reefs in the southern gulf, near Veracruz.  They found  that the oil had come in on a tropical storm and was  floating over the top of the reefs where it did not directly  impact them.  It had, however ringed a lot of the reef  islands with 12 to 15 inch-thick mats of oil. He continued to track and map these mats, returning each  June with his class.  'They slowly continued to break down,  particularly in the next five to six years after the spill.   After that time it was pretty hard to find any remnants of  the spill,' he said. Still, environmental campaigners note that no authoritative  assessment has ever been made. 'We don't know if the damage done [at Ixtoc] has been  remedied.  Petróleos Mexicanos (PEMEX, the state oil company)  has limited capacity for cleaning up pollution,' Gustavo  Ampugnani, Greenpeace International political coordinator  for Latin America, told IPS. *Emilio Godoy reported from Mexico. 