Despite the pleas of some conservative politicians that  parallels should not be drawn between the oil spreading over  the Gulf of Mexico and the need to transition out of a  reliance on fossil fuels, U. S.  President Barack Obama made it  clear Tuesday night that he sees the race against the  spreading oil as inherently connected to the race against a  changing climate. 'For decades, we've talked and talked about the need to end  America's century-long addiction to fossil fuels…And today,  as we look to the Gulf, we see an entire way of life being  threatened by a menacing cloud of black crude,' he said. 'We cannot consign our children to this future,' Obama  continued.  'The tragedy unfolding on our coast is the most  painful and powerful reminder yet that the time to embrace a  clean energy future is now.  Now is the moment for this  generation to embark on a national mission to unleash  America's innovation and seize control of our own destiny. 'Prior to the speech, a government panel reported that as  much as 60,000 barrels, or 2. 5 million gallons (9. 5 million  litres), of oil a day is gushing out of the compromised well  of the BP-operated Deepwater Horizon rig.  This doubles their  previous estimate — from just last Thursday — that said  25,000 to 30,000 gallons a day were leaking. The difference can be chalked up to the fact that the  previous estimate was for the amount of oil leaking prior to  BP cutting the riser pipe leading from the well in order to  attempt to fit a cap on the pipe.  That action has  temporarily increased the amount of oil flowing out, but  with the intention that the cap will eventually reduce the  amount of escaping oil. For now, though, it is unclear just how much of a success  the cap has been.  BP's eventual hope, according to plans the  company announced earlier this week, is that the cap would  help capture 2. 2 million gallons of oil a day by the end of  the month. Obama addressed those plans after meeting with top BP  officials at the White House Wednesday afternoon.  'Now, that's not good enough.  So we will continue to press  BP and draw on our best minds and resources to capture the  rest of the oil until the company finishes drilling a relief  well later in the summer that is expected to stop the leak  completely,' he said. That relief well is not expected to be finished until  August.  A 1979 oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico resulting  from an explosion at Pemex's Ixtoc I offshore rig continued  spewing crude for 10 months before a relief well was  completed. 'Pemex tried exactly the same things that BP did.  They tried  a top kill, they tried jamming different things in there,'  Thomas Shirley of the Harte Research Institute for Gulf of  Mexico Studies at Texas A&M University in Corpus Christi  said last week.  'If you complicate that by (the depth of the  Deepwater Horizon leak) it just makes things a lot more  complicated. 'The Ixtoc leak was at 150 feet (46 metres) of water while  Deepwater Horizon is at 5,000 feet (1,524 metres). Clearly, then, Obama's frustration is well-founded.  But the  main source of his frustration in recent weeks seems to be  his own inability to take any action to halt the ongoing  catastrophe — and the relentless criticism from all corners  over that lack of definitive action. Before the oil spill put almost all other projects on hold,  Obama was also widely criticised for his inability to  deliver on his efforts to limits the U. S. 's emissions of  greenhouse gases. Tuesday's speech tried to take on both issues, but reaction  was mixed. 'We are very pleased to hear President Obama reiterate his  call for a fundamental change in the nation's energy policy.   The president now needs to lay out the specifics.  What  exactly are the steps we know we can take now? What kind of  sacrifices can be made? How can every American help?' said  Sierra Club Executive Director Michael Brune. Indeed, specifics — of what Obama would like to see in a  climate bill or what he will do to mitigate damage from the  oil spill — were lacking. One announcement did come on Wednesday when the president  said BP had agreed to set aside 20 billion dollars to  compensate people and businesses for damages resulting from  the spill. That account will be managed by a third party, not the  government or BP, and be run by the same person who ran the  fund that compensated victims of the 9/11 terrorist attacks,  Ken Feingold. On the prospects for a climate bill, Obama said he was open  to any ideas 'as long they seriously tackle our addiction to  fossil fuels'. 'But the one approach I will not accept is inaction,' he  said. The second announcement that preceded the speech Tuesday  afternoon came from the Environmental Protection Agency,  which said that the measures contained within the proposed  climate bill titled the American Power Act would only cost  U. S.  households 79 to 146 dollars a year and that the limits  on carbon dioxide emissions in the bill would help avoid the  worst effects of climate change. 