European Union subsidies earmarked for reducing air travel's contribution to  climate change may help develop deadlier warplanes than those already found in  the world's arsenals, Brussels officials have admitted. Some 1. 6 billion euros (2 billion dollars) has been allocated to the EU's 'Clean  Sky' project, which aims to develop aircraft engines that emit half as much  carbon dioxide as those now in use.  With the funding being divided between  industry and the European taxpayer, plane and engine manufacturers have  stated that the project underscores their eagerness to be more ecologically  responsible.  Yet a closer look at the glossy brochures promoting the scientific research  initiative reveals that the list of participants reads like a who's who of major  arms producers from Europe and further afield.  These include Dassault, EADS,  Safran, Israel Aerospace Industries, Saab and Westland Helicopters.  Under the terms of their involvement, individual companies may apply for  patents on innovations realised during the course of their research.  The  European Commission, the EU's executive branch, says that there will be  nothing to stop such firms from using the technology they develop for  military purposes. Rudolf Strohmeier, deputy head of the Commission's scientific research  department, said that having EU-funded engines inserted into warplanes is  'something which you can't really exclude from the outset' as such engines  are 'easily switched over' from civilian to military aircraft. 'If a military airplane uses this type of technology, then it will be greener,' he  told IPS.  'But to my knowledge, this (potential military applications) is  definitely not the objective. 'The participation of Israel Aerospace Industries (IAI) in the project has drawn  criticism from some human rights advocates.  This firm supplied many of the  weapons used by Israel in its attacks on Gaza during late 2008 and early  2009.  Even though it is not a fully-fledged member of the EU, Israel is a  participant in its scientific research programme and has proven more adept at  drawing down grants than most of the Union's own states. An EU official, speaking on condition of anonymity, said that Israeli firms had  recently asked the Commission to support a project explicitly focused on  military aircraft but the request was turned down.  While the source said that  the EU's research activities are nominally civilian, no guarantees can be given  that their fruits will not have military applications.  'The Israelis don't play by  the same rules as everybody else,' the source added.  Frank Slijper from the Dutch Campaign Against the Arms Trade said: 'It is  beyond my comprehension how Israeli arms companies get Brussels money  for their research.  This really is a very weird situation.  As far as I know, IAI  does very little civilian business, it is just an arms company.  IAI has made a  clear and direct contribution in the Middle East against the Palestinians and  the Lebanese. 'As well as lowering their emissions of climate-changing gases, Clean Sky's  goals include the introduction of aircraft that consume less fuel and are less  noisy.  A project of this nature is bound to prove enticing for arms companies,  Slijper added.  'Mostly, they say it works the other way around: subsidies that  go into European military aircraft research have a spin-off effect for civilian  aircraft research work.  But this could be an example where subsidies for  environmental flying ultimately also benefit the military.  The more silent  aircraft are, the closer they can get to where they can pick their targets to  bomb before anyone might notice. 'Eric Dautriat, who directs the team overseeing the implementation of Clean  Sky, said 'I don't see what the problem is' with involving arms manufacturers,  who will have 'the same rules of participation' as the other firms and research  institutes involved.  Due to be completed in 2017, Clean Sky is one of the largest research  projects ever financed by the EU.  Gareth Williams, a representative of Airbus,  the French aviation firm, said that air traffic tends to double every 15 years  and is likely to double once more in the coming 15 years.  'With this growth in  the sector, we must address the issues around emissions,' he told a  conference held in Brussels Jun.  18. Aviation accounts for about 5 percent of all releases of climate-changing  gases into the atmosphere, with some studies predicting that the  environmental impact of flying will be three to four times greater than in  2000 by the middle of this century.  Unlike most other industries, aviation has  still not been brought within the scope of an international emissions control  agreement.  Jos Dings, director of the campaign group Transport and Environment,  questioned why the aviation industry is being lavished with subsidies under  Clean Sky, when it has been highly cosseted by EU governments for decades'The aviation sector already enjoys more than enough subsidies,' he said.   'There is no VAT (value added tax) on an airline ticket and it is the only mode  of transport where there is no fuel tax.  When it comes to subsidy  programmes, the industry is always very optimistic about bringing down  emissions.  But when it comes to other measures like a fuel tax, they are  always saying that absolutely nothing will bring down emissions so 'stop  thinking about applying legal measures to us'. 'Because scientists believe that greenhouse gases released at high altitude  have a more pronounced effect on the climate than those released at ground  level, aviation is considered the most environmentally damaging form of  transport. 'If we want to decarbonise our economy, aviation really should be one of the  first thing we should start to tackle,' Dings added.  'In these times of austerity,  it is absolutely untenable and irresponsible that we keep holding onto all tax  exemptions that the sector is enjoying.  Tackling these exemptions would be  one of the fairest ways for any austerity package to start. '  