The votes of six Caribbean countries could help decide whether  or not the International Whaling Commission (IWC) will ease  the 1986 global ban on commercial whaling and allow hunting in  the Southern Ocean Whale Sanctuary around Antarctica. Antigua and Barbuda, Dominica, St.  Kitts and Nevis, St.   Lucia, St.  Vincent and the Grenadines and Grenada, all  members of the Organisation of Eastern Caribbean States  (OECS), also belong to the IWC, which was set up in 1964 to  provide for the conservation of whale stocks. A proposal to allow a limited number of legal whale catches  will be put forward during the IWC's Jun.  21-25 meeting in  Morocco.  Environmentalists and others opposed to lifting the  ban are calling on Caribbean governments not to give in to  countries like Japan that have used their financial muscle  in the past to gain support in the 88-member IWC. Former Commonwealth secretary general Sir Shridath Ramphal  called the decision by the OECS to lend its support to Japan  a travesty. 'It's a great sadness to me that some of our smaller  countries…a significant number to make a difference in the  world's Whaling Commission, are in fact joining with them  (Japan) in perpetuating the slaughter, and in the end the  extinction of these mammals,' he said. 'The Japanese make no bones about it; they are using  chequebook diplomacy.  They are buying our votes and we fool  ourselves (into thinking) that we are part of the tradition  of whaling…what we are doing is making ourselves part of  their extinction,' he told delegates attending an  international environmental conference last month in  Grenada. Between 1986 and 1995, Grenada received more than 15 million  dollars in grant aid from Japan.  This year, the government  expects five million dollars in assistance for the  development of a coastal fisheries project in the western  town of Gouyave.  The situation is similar in other OECS  countries where Japanese funds have financed various  fisheries projects. Earlier this week, a British newspaper reported that  officials from a number of Pacific nations, as well as St.   Kitts and Nevis and Grenada, had openly offered to sell  their votes at the IWC to undercover reporters. Former Caribbean diplomat Sir Ronald Sanders, who is also  calling on regional countries not to support Japan, said  whales are worth more to the region alive than dead. 'A dead whale is no good to the Caribbean; we need live  whales…because we've got a burgeoning whale watching  industry, particularly in the Eastern Caribbean countries  that is an essential and growing part of their tourism  product,' he said. Environmentalist Dr.  Fitzroy Armour, who pioneered whale  watching in the Eastern Caribbean, said he is worried about  the negative impact a reversal of the global ban could have  on the Caribbean tourism industry. The proposal also calls for continuing whaling by Iceland  and Norway in violation of long-agreed scientific procedures  and the global whaling ban.  Armour recalls that a few decades ago, Grenada approved a  permit to Norway to hunt sperm whales in its waters.  In one  season, all the whales were wiped out, he said, 'and this  was with primitive equipment.  What do you think will happen  when today's whaling ships are equipped with sophisticated  equipment?''To date, the sperm whale is yet to make a rebound and is  presently on the endangered species list,' he said, warning  that 'killing the ocean whales will not only destroy them  but will add insult to the ongoing oil spill in the Gulf of  Mexico, which is an important ground for the North Atlantic  fishes. 'He said Japan has shipping fleets in the Caribbean that  would be able to 'totally destroy the whale watching  industry … if a permit is granted by one nation'. Since 1992, all the Caribbean members of the IWC have  consistently voted in favour of repealing the moratorium.   But last year, Dominica took the unprecedented step of not  voting in support of Japan, since it felt that such a move  would be at odds with its image as an ecologically-aware  island.  A study by the Australia-based firm Economists at Large &  Associates said whale-watching had become a 2. 1-billion- dollar global industry in 2008.  In the Caribbean and Central  America, whale-watching is growing at a significant rate,  with countries in the region now earning more than 54  million dollars a year from it as part of their tourism  product. An international conference on 'Sustainable 'blue' tourism  in the Caribbean' held in the French island of Martinique in  February strongly urged Caribbean governments 'to give their  full support and encouragement to whale-watching activities  as a valid and sustainable means of protecting marine mammal  populations and creating jobs, earning foreign exchange and  providing sustainable livelihoods for fishermen and local  coastal communities' . Marine biologist Lyne Morrisette of the Marine Science  Institute of Canada said a three-year research project that  simulated the removal of whales from the Caribbean's ocean  ecosystem did not result in an increase in fish stocks. 'Whales feed in cold waters of the North Atlantic, in the  St.  Lawrence, the Bay of Fundy or Europe,' Morrisette said.   'Then they come down here to breed and to have their babies.   During that time they are nursing and they don't feed at  all. 'But Grenada's commissioner designate to the IWC Justin  Rennie dismissed the study.  'In the Caribbean, we are not  separated by other regions in terms of the resources,' he  declared.  'So while (whales) may not be feeding here, they  might be feeding in another area…so we cannot just look at  the Caribbean as a separate entity. 'Environmentalist Atherton Martin says Dominica needs to  provide leadership on the conservation issues that are  raised at the IWC and should also propose the establishment  of a whale sanctuary in the Caribbean. 'France has already taken the lead.  We need to join and  incorporate the science that France bring into the marine  environment and do the same,' he said. 