Haitian farmers are worried that large transnational  corporations like Monsanto are attempting to gain a larger  foothold in the local economy under the guise of earthquake  relief and rebuilding. 'Seeds represent a kind of right to life,' peasant leader  Chavannes Jean-Baptiste told IPS.  'That's why we have a  problem today with Monsanto and all the multinationals who  sell seeds.  Seeds and water are the common patrimony of  humanity. 'Earlier this month, in the central square of Hinche, an  agricultural town in Haiti's Plateau Central region, a mass  of small farmers wearing red shirts and straw hats burned a  symbolic quantity of hybrid corn seed donated to Haiti by  the U. S.  agricultural-technology giant.  They called on farmers to burn any Monsanto seeds already  distributed, and demanded that the government reject further  shipments. The actions in Hinche (pronounced 'ansh') were spearheaded  by the Mouvman Peyizan Papay, a regional peasant movement  that claims 50,000 members, and the national coalition of  some 200,000 members to which it belongs.  Despite divisions  among Haitian peasant organisations, several of the most  important groups joined together to participate. Jean-Baptiste has led the MPP since 1973 and plays a major  role in the international peasant movement. 'Our primary goal is to defend peasant agriculture,' he  said, 'an organic agriculture that respects the environment  and fights against its degradation.  We defend native seeds  and the rights of peasants on their land. 'The international peasant movement advocates for 'food  sovereignty', Jean-Baptiste emphasised, the right of each  country to define its agricultural policy, of communities to  decide what to produce, and of consumers to know that the  products they consume are healthy. 'We work with indigenous groups as well, and with them we  believe that the earth has rights that we must respect, just  as people have rights,' he said. The actions against Monsanto also were targeted 'against the  policies of the government that don't help peasants, but  rather accept products that poison the environment, kill  biodiversity and destroy family, peasant agriculture,' he  contended. According to Monsanto, 130 tonnes of hybrid corn and  vegetable seed out of a promised 475 tonnes have been sent  so far, with the first shipment arriving in Haiti during the  first week of May.  The remaining 345 tonnes, which will be  hybrid corn seed, are to be delivered over the coming 12  months. The company stressed in a news release that the seeds are  not genetically modified, as some early reports stated, but  acknowledged that some seeds are coated with fungicides and  pesticides. Monsanto consulted with the Haitian Ministry of Agriculture  on what seeds would be acceptable to Haitian farmers and  well-suited for Haitian conditions, Darren Wallis, a  spokesman for the firm, told IPS in an e-mail. A programme of the U. S.  government's Agency for  International Development, the Watershed Initiative for  National Natural Environmental Resources, and the non-profit  Earth Institute will distribute the seeds along with inputs  such as fertilisers and provide technical support, Monsanto  said.  WINNER describes itself as 'a 127-million-dollar project …  which aims to improve the living conditions of the rural  populations in Haïti'. But speakers at the Jun.  4 rally saw the project in a  different light, accusing President René Préval of  'collusion with imperialism' and 'selling off the national  patrimony'. Although Jean-Baptiste was a key architect of the election  of Préval to his first term in 1995, the peasant leader now  says bitterly of the politician: 'He has simply betrayed the  ideas that we stood for. 'Jean-Baptiste sees the seed donation by Monsanto as a  beachhead in a battle between Haitian popular organisations  and the U. S.  and European transnational corporations who, he  says, dominate the Haitian government and the reconstruction  effort. 'The government is selling off the country or giving it away  as a gift.  Not only is Monsanto trying to get in, but  they're talking about Coca Cola coming in to plant mangoes.   The Haitian people are fighting to make sure that all the  generous international aid will be channeled into genuine  programmes of sustainable development. 'Mistrust of the intentions of transnational corporations and  the United States government is strong among many Haitians  and based on a long history.  The square in Hinche where the  demonstration took place is named after Charlemagne Péralte,  the leader of a peasant uprising against the occupation of  Haiti by the U. S.  Marines, which lasted from 1915 until  1934. The history of damage to Haitian farmers by foreign aid is  also long and painful. In the 1980s, Creole pigs were almost completely eradicated  under heavy pressure from the Ronald Reagan administration.   The animals were once known as 'the savings bank of the  Haitian peasant', and were bred over centuries to thrive in  the Haitian environment. An epidemic of African Swine Flu that began in the  neighbouring Dominican Republic was killing pigs, and U. S.   authorities feared that it could spread to North America.   Although some Haitian organisations proposed alternatives  for controlling the disease, the Duvalier dictatorship  violently imposed the will of the U. S.  in the face of  resistance by many Haitian farmers. The variety of pig sent from the U. S.  as a replacement was  much less hardy and required expensive inputs and  facilities.  Virtually none survived.  Many Haitian families  were never compensated and suffered a crippling blow to  their livelihood, in some cases having to pull their  children out of school, according to Grassroots  International, a U. S.  non-governmental organisation. The group has been working with Haitian peasant groups since  1997 to repopulate Creole pigs across Haiti. Testifying before the U. S.  Senate in March, former President  Bill Clinton offered a notable apology for the policies of  his administration towards Haitian agriculture.  He lamented  that forcing Haiti to lower tariffs on subsidised U. S.  rice  may have helped rice farmers in his home state of Arkansas,  but destroyed the capacity of Haitian rice farmers to feed  their country. Calling his policy a 'devil's bargain,' he said: 'We should  have continued to work to help them [Haitian rice farmers]  be self-sufficient in agriculture. 'Chavannes Jean-Baptiste traveled to the U. S.  and the United  Nations from Jun.  11 to 14 for meetings to discuss the  Monsanto donation and alternatives for Haitian agriculture  proposed by Haitian peasants. *Peter Costantini blogs at  http://www. huffingtonpost. com/crossover-dreams.  He spent the  month of May in Haiti. 