With water shortages constraining food production growth, the  world needs an effort to raise water productivity similar to  the one that nearly tripled land productivity over the last  half-century. Since it takes 1,000 tonnes of water to produce one tonne of  grain, it is not surprising that 70 percent of world water  use is devoted to irrigation.  Thus, raising irrigation  efficiency is central to raising water productivity overall.  Data on the efficiency of surface water projects - that is,  dams that deliver water to farmers through a network of  canals - show that crop usage of irrigation water never  reaches 100 percent simply because some irrigation water  evaporates, some percolates downward, and some runs off. Water policy analysts Sandra Postel and Amy Vickers found  that 'surface water irrigation efficiency ranges between 25  and 40 percent in India, Mexico, Pakistan, the Philippines,  and Thailand; between 40 and 45 percent in Malaysia and  Morocco; and between 50 and 60 percent in Israel, Japan, and  Taiwan. 'Irrigation water efficiency is affected not only by the type  and condition of irrigation systems but also by soil type,  temperature, and humidity.  In hot arid regions, the  evaporation of irrigation water is far higher than in cooler  humid regions. In a May 2004 meeting, China's Minister of Water Resources  Wang Shucheng outlined for me in some detail the plans to  raise China's irrigation efficiency from 43 percent in 2000  to 51 percent in 2010 and then to 55 percent in 2030.  The  steps he described included raising the price of water,  providing incentives for adopting more irrigation-efficient  technologies, and developing the local institutions to  manage this process.  Reaching these goals, he felt, would  assure China's future food security. Raising irrigation efficiency typically means shifting from  the less efficient flood or furrow systems to overhead  sprinklers or drip irrigation, the gold standard of  irrigation efficiency.  Switching from flood or furrow to  low-pressure sprinkler systems reduces water use by an  estimated 30 percent, while switching to drip irrigation  typically cuts water use in half. As an alternative to furrow irrigation, a drip system also  raises yields because it provides a steady supply of water  with minimal losses to evaporation.  Since drip systems are  both labour-intensive and water-efficient, they are well  suited to countries with a surplus of labour and a shortage  of water. A few small countries - Cyprus, Israel, and Jordan - rely  heavily on drip irrigation.  Among the big three agricultural  producers, this more-efficient technology is used on one to  three percent of irrigated land in India and China and on  roughly four percent in the United States. In recent years, small-scale drip-irrigation systems -  literally a bucket with flexible plastic tubing to  distribute the water - have been developed to irrigate small  vegetable gardens with roughly 100 plants (covering 25  square metres).  Somewhat larger systems using drums irrigate  125 square metres.  In both cases, the containers are  elevated slightly, so that gravity distributes the water. Large-scale drip systems using plastic lines that can be  moved easily are also becoming popular.  These simple systems  can pay for themselves in one year.  By simultaneously  reducing water costs and raising yields, they can  dramatically raise incomes of smallholders. Sandra Postel estimates that drip technology has the  potential to profitably irrigate 10 million hectares of  India's cropland, nearly one-tenth of the total.  She sees a  similar potential for China, which is now also expanding its  drip irrigated area to save scarce water. In the Punjab, with its extensive double cropping of wheat  and rice, fast-falling water tables led the state farmers'  commission in 2007 to recommend a delay in transplanting  rice from May to late June or early July.  This would reduce  irrigation water use by roughly one-third, since  transplanting would coincide with the arrival of the  monsoon.  The resulting reduction in groundwater use would  help stabilise the water table, which has fallen from five  metres below the surface down to 30 metres in parts of the  state. Institutional shifts - specifically, moving the  responsibility for managing irrigation systems from  government agencies to local water users associations - can  facilitate the more efficient use of water.  In many  countries farmers are organising locally so they can assume  this responsibility, and since they have an economic stake  in good water management, they tend to do a better job than  a distant government agency. Mexico is a leader in developing water users associations.   As of 2008, farmers associations managed more than 99  percent of the irrigated area held in public irrigation  districts.  One advantage of this shift for the government is  that the cost of maintaining the irrigation system is  assumed locally, reducing the drain on the treasury.  This  means that associations often need to charge more for  irrigation water, but for farmers the production gains from  managing their water supply themselves more than outweigh  this additional outlay. In Tunisia, where water users' associations manage both  irrigation and residential water, the number of associations  increased from 340 in 1987 to 2,575 in 1999, covering much  of the country.  As of 2009, China has more than 40,000 water  users associations to locally manage water resources and to  maximise water use efficiency.  Many other countries now have  similar bodies. Although the first groups were organised to deal with large  publicly developed irrigation systems, some recent ones have  been formed to manage local groundwater irrigation as well.   Their goal is to stabilise the water table to avoid aquifer  depletion and the economic disruption that it brings to the  community. Low water productivity is often the result of low water  prices.  In many countries, subsidies lead to irrationally  low water prices, creating the impression that water is  abundant when in fact it is scarce.  As water becomes scarce,  it needs to be priced accordingly. A new mindset is needed, a new way of thinking about water  use.  For example, shifting to more water-efficient crops  wherever possible boosts water productivity.  Rice production  is being phased out around Beijing because rice is such a  thirsty crop.  Similarly, Egypt restricts rice production in  favour of wheat. Any measures that raise crop yields on irrigated land also  raise the productivity of irrigation water.  For people  consuming unhealthy amounts of livestock products, moving  down the food chain reduces water use. In the United States, where the annual consumption of grain  as food and feed averages some 800 kilogrammes per person, a  modest reduction in the consumption of meat, milk, and eggs  could easily cut grain use per person by 100 kilogrammes.   For 300 million Americans, such a reduction would cut grain  use by 30 million tonnes and the need for irrigation water  by 30 billion tonnes. Bringing water use down to the sustainable yield of aquifers  and rivers worldwide involves a wide range of measures not  only in agriculture but throughout the economy.  The more  obvious steps, in addition to more water-efficient  irrigation practices and water-efficient crops, include  adopting more water-efficient industrial processes and using  both more water-efficient household appliances and those  that use no water at all, such as the new odourless dry- compost toilets. Recycling urban water supplies is another obvious step in  countries facing acute water shortages. *Lester R.  Brown is founder and president of the Earth  Policy Institute.  This article is adapted from Chapter 9,  'Feeding Eight Billion People Well' in Brown's 'Plan B 4. 0:  Mobilizing to Save Civilisation' (New York: W. W.  Norton &  Company, 2009), available on-line at  www. earthpolicy. org/index. php?/books/pb4. 