With threats looming large on the survival of several wildlife species in the  Himalayan state of Jammu and Kashmir in northern India, experts warn that  these species could go extinct in the coming years unless immediate steps are  taken to prevent their extinction. Such species include the ‘hangul’ — the only Asiatic survivor or sub-species of  the European red deer in the Himalayas, says B.  M.  Arora, head of the  Association of Indian Zoo and Wildlife Veterinarians. In the 1980s, the estimated population of the hangul was more than 400 in  the 141-square-kilometre Dachigam National Park, a wildlife sanctuary in  the region, says wildlife researcher Dr Khursheed Ahmad.  Today the  endangered animal’s population is down to an estimated 150 to 170, he says.  Ahmad says there is a need expand the range and habitat of the hangul to the  sub-alpine and alpine meadows in upper Dachigam to ensure its survival.   This requires freeing the area of livestock and 'anthropogenic pressures by  controlling poaching and disturbances,' he adds. Ahmad reveals he and his colleagues in the campaign for conservation of  biodiversity have forwarded several recommendations to the Jammu and  Kashmir government for the preservation of endangered species in the  region. 'We also sought funding for importing the latest technology from the  countries where technological interventions have achieved the best results in  terms of biodiversity conservation,' he tells IPS.  He refuses, however, to  divulge the details of their proposals pending response from the government. As early as 1996, the International Union for Conservation of Nature’s Red  Data Book — which contains lists of species at risk of extinction — has declared  the hangul, or Kashmir red deer, as one of three species that were critically  endangered in Jammu and Kashmir.  The others are the markhor — the world’s largest species of wild goat found in  Pakistan, Afghanistan, Uzbekistan, Turkmenistan and Tajikistan and the  disputed Kashmir territory — and the Tibetan antelope or ‘chiru’, found mostly  in the mountainous regions of Mongolia and the Himalayas, where Jammu and  Kashmir is mostly situated.  Nine other species are also facing extinction in the Himalayas.  These are the  musk deer, snow leopard, brown bear, ibex, common leopard, Himalayan  tahr, serow, Tibetan gazzelle, and golden eagle, says Rashid Naqash, wildlife  warden for central Kashmir. Despite the promulgation of the anti-poaching law, rampant poaching is the  chief cause of the decline in hangul population, says Arora.  The Wild Life (Protection) Act of 1972, which applies to the whole of India  except for Jammu and Kashmir, and the Jammu and Kashmir Wildlife  (Protection) Act place the hangul, the chiru, and other wild animal species in  Schedule I, which accords them absolute protection and prescribes the stiffest  penalties for the corresponding offenses.    But despite the implementation of strict laws, animals like the markhor are  still the objects of intensive hunting, which has caused a steady decline in  their population.  It is also believed that the conflict in Kashmir is affecting  wildlife.  'Poaching, overgrazing and constant conflicts at the border areas are the  major threats to markhor conservation in Jammu and Kashmir,' says Ahmad.   'Therefore collaborative management of areas inhabited by the markhor  needs to be undertaken with the Indian army in border areas. ' Kashmir is in the centre of a territorial conflict involving India and Pakistan.   Prolonged, bloody border disputes and the presence of armed forces in the  forest areas of Kashmir have posed serious threats to the natural habitat of  wild animals that are native to this region. Conservation of the hangul and other endangered species is not 'impossible'  if the needed measures are pursued immediately, says Ahmad.   To prevent the extinction of certain animal species, he says some countries  have successfully adopted certain technologies, including artificial  insemination to breed wild animals. 'We can also import this technology to increase the population of the hangul,'  he says. Experts say that the potential extinction of certain animal species is both an  ecological and an economic threat, given the contribution of these species to  the economy of Jammu and Kashmir. For instance, the musk secreted by the musk deer — which is used to make  perfume —and the ‘shahtoosh’ (Persian word meaning ‘king of wools’) shawls  made from the wool of the Tibetan antelope are the backbone of the  economy of Kashmir, says Ahmad. Trade in these products has been banned globally since 1975 under the  Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species.  While the Indian  government banned shahtoosh trade in 1991, the Jammu and Kashmir  government allowed the trade until the year 2000 for the sake of artisans  benefiting from this trade.  Shahtoosh is highly valued in South Asia for its  softness and warmth. Ahmad says a special conservation breeding programme on the musk deer  and Tibetan antelope needs to be urgently pursued by Kashmir’s Wildlife  department using modern technology to revive the livelihood of Kashmiri  artisans. Hussain Abbass, a Kashmiri shahtoosh shawl maker, says he does not favor  the ban on shahtoosh trade, which he says does not require killing the chiru.   'Fur shed naturally by these animals gets stuck on bushes, and it is then  collected and made into wool,' he reasons.   But the Wildlife Protection Society of India (WPSI) belies this claim.  'Virtually  no bushes are found in the steep, snowy and windswept areas where the chiru  live for this to be possible,' says WPSI in its book ‘Shatoosh: the Illegal Trade’,  which was published in 2006. 'Do not be fooled by myths and rumours spread by dealers to soften the  brutality involved in the illegal trade of shahtoosh.  Today every shawl seller  knows that the Tibetan antelope or chiru is killed and skinned to obtain raw  shahtoosh wool. '