The committed determination of young people in the  environmental justice movement is emerging as a highlight of  the 2010 U. S.  Social Forum, which opened in Detroit this week  with some 20,000 activists meeting in 'Motor City' to network  and share their visions for social change. On Wednesday, a group of youth activists from San Francisco  described their ongoing fight against pollution in minority  communities and efforts to resist multinational corporations  that are using communities of colour as dump sites for toxic  waste. 'Pollution Has No Borders: Black, Chinese and Latino Youth  Organising for Environmental Justice in San Francisco' was  the theme of the workshop that spotlighted the west coast  city's environmental issues as a national concern. 'In the Bayview district where minorities live, they are  targeted the most with pollution and many of the people who  live there don't even know it,' said 18-year-old Ingried  Seyundo, a youth organiser with People Organising to Demand  Environmental and Economic Rights (PODER). 'Big corporations with power plants are polluting minority  districts and little kids are getting sick, mostly with  cancer, [while other problems include] heart attack and high  blood pressure,' Seyundo said. The situation is evocative of the notorious 'cancer alley'  in the U. S.  South, where an 85-mile stretch of the  Mississippi River between Baton Rouge and New Orleans is  home to some 140 companies that produce a quarter of the  petrochemical products manufactured in the United States.  In  1993, a federal commission found that the industry had a  disproportionate impact on the area's minority residents. Now, five communities in San Francisco — Bayview Hunter's  Point, Portola, Excelsior, Visitation Valley and Mission —  are in the eye of another environmental battle, in large  part because they are heavily populated with working-class  people of colour, activists charge. 'It is important for us to educate ourselves about these  environmental issues.  You don't have to be living in an  unbearable condition and not raising your voice,' said 18- year-old Tiffany Ng of the Common Roots Programme of the  Chinese Progressive Association of San Francisco (CPAS). Ng said her group develops cross-cultural solidarity,  deepens young people's understanding of the social and  political issues facing their community and enhances their  leadership skills. After a long fight, Ingried said the community successfully  demanded truck routes through their residential  neighbourhoods that featured hybrid buses and trucks with  less environmental impact, instead of those with diesel  fuel. 'We campaigned against trucks running in residential areas,'  Ng said.  'We created truck routes that now allow these  trucks to drive away from places where there are lots of  children, like schools, and also where the elderly live. 'Loreen Dangerfield, 15, with People Organised to Win  Environmental Rights (POWER), said at issue right now is the  building of condominiums on a toxic site by Lennar  Corporation, a Florida-based housing redevelopment company.   According to the young activists, the site is on the Hunters  Point Naval shipyard where the atomic bombs to Hiroshima and  Nagasaki were shipped from. 'The shipyard itself is toxic and it's a landfill,'  Dangerfield said.  'In Miami, Lennar built houses on top of  undetonated bombs and people started getting sick. 'Lennar wants to build 8,500 homes, including some high-rise  towers.  The plans feature 300 acres of open space, 80,000  square feet of retail and 150,000 square feet of office  space. But first the youth organisers are demanding an independent  environmental impact report — one they say is not  manipulated to suit the interests of the developers but  fully addresses the health risks associated with building on  toxic sites. 'We don't want Lennar to build the condominiums.  They bought  the shipyard - 700 acres - for a dollar,' Dangerfield said. Lennar has been digging into asbestos-rich serpentine rock,  the young people said, sending up plumes of carcinogenic  dust near residential areas and schools. Ingreid said the Bay Area Quality Management District has  been under pressure to monitor Lennar.  BAAQMD voted to fine  the firm for not properly monitoring toxicity levels  emerging from its massive construction of the condominiums. California law requires the redevelopment company to monitor  toxins and inform residents when asbestos reaches a  dangerous level, but community members were kept in the  dark, according to the youth activists. Teresa Almaguer, youth programme coordinator for PODER, said  it was important to share the environmental justice concerns  of San Francisco's poor neighbourhoods with other activists  at the U. S.  Social Forum. 'What is taking place in San Francisco is happening all over  the world.  Environmental racism is institutionalised,'  Almaguer said.  'It's decisions being made all over by  planning departments in cities across the nation.  We want to  stress the importance of building because we are all equally  getting sick. 'Almaguer said working class families are being displaced by  gentrification in San Francisco because they would never be  able to afford the cost of condominiums in addition to the  environmental threats arising from such developments. 'As we are fighting to create safe and healthy  neighbourhoods, we are being displaced.  This is a global  issue,' Almaguer said.  'We also want to bring attention to  Lennar.  We need to struggle and work together because we can  accomplish big things. 'Even though not all members of the San Francisco Board of  Supervisors are supporting their push, Almaguer said they  are holding elected officials accountable by issuing a  report card on their environmental stance. Sandar Sebastian from New York who is attending the weeklong  forum in Detroit told IPS she was impressed to observe the  energy and knowledge the San Francisco youth showed at the  workshop to educate their fellow young people from all  around the country. 'I think it is really powerful to find young people who are  so engaged with this kind of analysis of environmental  justice and linking environmental racism to the impact on  their daily lives,' Sebastian said. She added that their struggle amplifies how 'racist policies  threaten the daily lives of people in low-income  communities'. 