Eventually, the oil spewing from the ruptured well of BP's  Deepwater Horizon offshore rig will stop.  And some time after  that the bulk of the mess will be cleaned up.  By then, though,  the amount of damage done to the Gulf of Mexico may be  catastrophic - but will we know just how catastrophic?Extensive studies will be needed to determine the extent of  the damage from the massive oil leak, say scientists, and  the aftermath of past spills shows there is a spotty record  of those studies actually being done.  This time, they hope,  it will be different. In fact, with enough funding and public outcry, some  scientists are confident that this oil disaster will produce  one of the most informative and useful bodies of research on  oil spill impacts ever. 'All over the world, whenever major oil spills happen,  everybody, all in a flurry, goes and starts studying and  they study for usually about a year.  But once the spill is  stopped and everything is cleaned up, most of the funding  stops.  That's why we don't have — hardly anywhere in the  world — any really good, say, ten-year studies of major oil  spills and what they did,' said Wes Tunnel, a biologist with  the Harte Research Institute for Gulf of Mexico Studies at  Texas A&M University in Corpus Christi. 'Sometimes people go back every five years, 10 years, maybe  20 years and look at some of the big places but we don't  have any ecosystem-wide studies to tell us [what happened].   And it's a real shame.  I hope and think that it may be  changed with this spill,' he told IPS. There are signs that it may indeed change.  On May 24, BP  announced it would create an independent Gulf Research  Initiative to fund projects studying 'the impact of the  Deepwater Horizon incident, and its associated response, on  the environment and public health in the Gulf of Mexico'.   They committed 500 million dollars to the initiative. On Jun.  15, the first allocations of the money were  announced with several universities around the gulf region  to receive a combined 25 million dollars in funding.  The  remaining funds are expected to be allocated over the next  10 years. Tunnel sees a lot of potential in this fund: 'With this 500  million that BP has put up for the next 10 years, if that  works out like they're saying, this could be one of the best  studied spills ever. 'The previously-worst Gulf of Mexico oil spill was largely a  missed opportunity for scientists.  After Pemex's Ixtoc I rig  exploded in the southwestern gulf in 1979, releasing around  140 million U. S.  gallons of crude over 290 days, there was  the typical flurry of interest, but then the funding dried  up.  This led to a surprising dearth of published studies on  that disaster's impacts. 'Washington pulled all our funding after we had our initial  projects done,' Tunnel recounts.  'That's pretty normal. 'The one exception to this normal pattern in which funding  drops off when heightened public interest drops off was the  Exxon Valdez spill in 1989. After a tanker leaked 40. 9 million litres of oil into  Alaska's Prince William Sound, the public outcry was so  great that numerous studies were done of its effect on  wildlife and ecosystems — and some of those studies continue  today. Of course, points out Tunnel, much of that was forced by  litigation. Still, says Thomas Shirley, also of the Harte Research  Institute, 'For all the bad things [Exxon Valdez] did, it  generated a huge amount of biological knowledge. ' He says the current spill 'will no doubt fund lots more…a  lot of knowledge will come out of this. 'Assessing a unique disasterShirley has studied the long-term effects of the Exxon  Valdez spill first-hand, and the lessons that came out of  that spill do not bode well for the outcome of the Deepwater  Horizon spill. 'There are still 21,000 gallons of oil in Prince William  Sound — you can stick your hand in it.  It's under the rocks,  but it's there,' said Shirley.  He says there are many  species that have not yet fully recovered. But, there, the oil remained on the surface of the water,  which made it much easier both to clean up and to measure. Even the under-studied Ixtoc spill occurred in only 46  metres of water.  The Deepwater Horizon leak is at 1,524  metres.  This depth, plus the unprecedented amount of  chemical dispersants sprayed on the oil, makes the spill  something unique. 'We've never faced an oil spill of this magnitude.  We never  faced these oil plumes.  We don't know how all this is going  to play out,' Shirley said. Further complicating the picture are findings that Shirley,  along with 139 other scientists from 15 countries, released  in spring 2009.  As part of an inventory of the flora and  fauna of the Gulf of Mexico, the researchers found that the  area around the ruptured Deepwater Horizon well is home to  the greatest number of species of any area of a similar  depth in the gulf. 'It was very surprising,' said Shirley.  'This area is truly  the hotspot for the deep Gulf of Mexico based on our current  explorations. 'So far, the impacts on that wildlife have only been  sporadically visible, but much more damage may be below the  sea's surface, and many dead animals will sink to the  bottom.  'Even for those carcasses that do wash up, it will  be hard to tell whether they died due to oil-related  causes,' he said.  'We don't really know how much oil is down  there — but we know there will be effects. 'Future studies could make those effects more visible, and  though hopes for the gulf ecosystem emerging unscathed are  still dim, hopes remain high that this disaster will produce  a wealth of information on how oil affects wildlife in the  gulf and elsewhere. 