The 2010 U. S.  Social Forum ended Saturday in Detroit, a city  viewed by many as a metaphor for the excesses of U. S.   capitalism, with strong parting words from Pablo Solon,  Bolivia's permanent representative to the United Nations. On Saturday evening, to the thunderous applause of the  thousands of civil society delegates who attended the  weeklong forum in 'Motor City', Solon called on activists to  lobby the United Nations for an international tribunal  empowered to prosecute those endangering what he repeatedly  referred to as 'mother earth's rights'. Solon said the British Petroleum oil spill in the Gulf of  Mexico, which is wrecking livelihoods and ocean and shore  ecosystems alike, is a perfect example of the kind of issue  that should be brought before an international court  designed to address such environmental cases. 'There has to be justice.  This is something we cannot  accept,' Solon said.  'The message is we need to build an  environmental court of justice when it comes to nature and  mother earth. 'The Bolivian diplomat said the great challenge of this  century is to 'build a new environmental and social  contract', dismissing the vision promoted by Group of Eight  (G8) wealthy industrialised nations — also meeting this  weekend in Canada, along with the slightly larger G20 bloc   - of a 'green economy'. 'What do they mean by a green economy? That means we have to  bring capitalism to nature.  They want a price placed on  nature,' Solon said.  'We are in the middle of a new  offensive and it's going to be the Washington consensus -  privatisation and commodification of water.  We have to find  a new alternative. 'He added that his nation is urging the U. N.  to declare that  access to adequate water and sanitation is a human right. Solon reiterated Bolivian President Evo Morales's commitment  to the environment, which he said was the idea behind the  World People's Summit on Climate Change and Rights of Mother  Earth held in Tiquipaya in April. 'In order to  guarantee human rights, we have to defend  mother earth's rights,' he said. Solon also railed against the U. N.  Security Council and its  five permanent members, which he called 'anti-democratic'  because they were not elected by the General Assembly. Critics of the Security Council have long labeled that most  powerful body in the U. N.  as an example of 'Western hegemony  and control', questioning why regions like Latin America and  Africa cannot have a permanent seat instead of a rotating  membership. 'You can't have a small group of nations think they are  going to decide for the rest,' Solon said, referring to the  U. S. , Britain, China, Russia and France. The ambassador's remarks were reflective of the fiery issues  with tremendous national and international implications  tabled at this year's forum, where activists tried to  connect the dots between what is happening locally and on  the global scene. Vanessa Nisperos from New York said she got what she hoped  for at the forum. 'I met a lot of people who are like me - street fighters -  who are committed to make a change,' Nisperos said. She said one of the sessions on transformative organising  models made her reconsider her approach to social justice  issues. 'Sometimes people involved in social justice causes don't  necessarily treat people who work for them with respect.   That session helped me understand how to sit back and think  about how we deal with each other with respect and also take  a break,' Nisperos said. She is going home to New York with a lot of connections and  a 'renewed passion for things that I'm committed to'. Maureen Taylor, head of the Michigan Welfare Rights  Organisation and chair of the U. S.  Social Forum organising  committee in Detroit, described the gathering as a success  and economic boost for the city, which has shed thousands of  jobs in its lifeblood auto industry over the last few years. 'We secured 3,000 hotel rooms in downtown Detroit, except  for the MGM Grand Hotel who wouldn't work with us,' Taylor  said.  'It was good to come to Detroit.  We are validated.   We've got love, commitment and anger. 'Taylor said the recommendations that arose from the 20,000- plus attendees will all be codified into a report that will  be issued in the next three or four months. 'Many issues, local and national, were identified in the  different plenary sessions,' Taylor said.  'But certainly the  clarion call on what to do next will be released soon. 'Taylor also said one focus of the forum was unity of  purpose, which she said was on display at the tents set up  by activists. 'In the tents we have some Detroit Muslims sharing candles  and prayer rugs with the Quakers,' Taylor said.  'That is  what the social forum is about. 'She said that kind of camaraderie is needed to fight the  bigger and sometimes seemingly overwhelming issues they are  facing as activists. Mary Kramer, an organiser for the forum, said Detroit will  be remembered as a gathering that birthed new ideas and  reaffirmed people's commitment to real change. 'We talked about a world court for abuses against women.  You  could see the enthusiasm amongst the people and for it to be  in Detroit was big.  We truly see another world is possible,'  Kramer said. 