Australia’s newly appointed prime minister, Julia Gillard, has hardly warmed her  seat, yet she has already been urged to take action on climate change. 'We call on Prime Minister-elect Gillard to make good on her party’s promise  to take the threat posed by climate change seriously,' said Dr Linda Selvey,  chief executive officer of Greenpeace Australia Pacific, last week after Gillard  replaced Kevin Rudd as Australia’s prime minister. Gilliard, who was sworn in Australia’s 27th prime minister on Jun.  24, is the  first woman to hold this country’s highest political office.  The parliamentary members of the governing Australian Labor Party (ALP) last  week lost confidence in Rudd’s ability to lead the ALP to consecutive election  wins after a disastrous few months and elevated 48-year-old Gillard, Rudd’s  former deputy, to the top job. Despite riding high in opinion polls conducted in the first two years of his  term, Rudd’s popularity had shrunk considerably in recent months.  While part of this slide can be attributed to policy blunders, including the  failure to counter the conservative Opposition’s claims that the Rudd  government was soft on border security and the recent battle with mining  companies over increased taxation, Rudd’s perceived inability to match action  with his own rhetoric on climate change was a decisive factor in his downfall. Rudd, who famously dubbed climate change as 'the great moral challenge of  our generation,' led the ALP to victory in the 2007 election partly as a result  of perceptions that he had better policies on climate change and the  environment than the then incumbent John Howard.   But while Rudd was widely applauded for immediately taking steps to ratify  the Kyoto Protocol — under which countries committed to reductions in  greenhouse gases (GhG) and which Howard had refused to back — his  government was heavily criticised when it announced in December 2008 that  its target for 2020 was just a five to 15 percent reduction in GhG emissions  on 2000 levels.  This was even less than the cut of between 10 and 25 percent that had earlier  been recommended by Prof Ross Garnaut, the Rudd government’s chief  climate change advisor, and which had also been slammed. But things went from bad to worse for Rudd, who had been banking on an  emissions trading scheme (ETS) to deliver the 2020 reduction target. Also known as a cap-and-trade system, an ETS puts a price on carbon  emissions to encourage major polluters to reduce their emissions. The ETS legislation failed on three occasions to make it through parliament,  with the Opposition and the minor Australian Greens Party both against the  scheme, albeit for quite different reasons.  The Opposition was divided over climate change policies while the Greens  regarded the ETS as too weak to be effective. This led Rudd to delay the ETS, which he did in April, declaring that his  government would not seek to implement the scheme again until after the  current Kyoto commitment period concludes at the end of 2012. 'By the end of that period the governments around the world will be required  to make clear their commitments for the post-2012 period.  And that will  provide, therefore, the Australian Government with a better position to assess  the level of global action on climate change prior to the implementation of [an  ETS],' said Rudd at the time. For a prime minister who promoted himself as a genuine leader and who, last  November, slammed suggestions that Australia should wait until after the  Copenhagen climate conference before acting to reduce its GhG emissions as  'absolute political cowardice' and a 'failure of leadership,' such weak policies  undermined his own image and added to growing disquiet among voters.  'The electorate felt betrayed by Kevin Rudd when he walked away from such a  fundamental commitment.  It is clear the government vastly underestimated  the desire in the community for real action on climate change,' said Selvey. That desire does seem genuine.  According to a poll conducted in March and  released earlier this month by the Lowy Institute, a Sydney-based think tank,  72 percent of respondents wanted Australia, among the world’s biggest  carbon polluters per capita, to take action to reduce its GhG emissions even  without a post-Kyoto global agreement in place. And that is what the new prime minister, aiming to get a mandate on action  from an election likely to be held within months, is now being implored to do. 'I congratulate Ms Gillard and urge her to lead an Australian shift from a  pollution-dependent economy to a clean economy and a healthy  environment,' said Don Henry, CEO of the Australian Conservation  Foundation, a non-governmental community-based organisation. Others, including representatives from the Investor Group on Climate Change,  which represents investors concerned with the impact of global warming, and  the Climate Institute, an independent research organisation, have also called  on her to act.   For her part, Gillard has labelled climate change as a top priority of her  government in a nationally broadcast media conference last week, along with  refugees and reaching an agreement on the mining tax.   'If elected as prime minister [at the next election], I will re-prosecute the case  for a carbon price at home and abroad,' said Gillard, who has also raised the  possibility of introducing a carbon tax to promote renewable energy sources  to reduce GhG emissions if no broad-based support for an ETS exists. Whatever policies she makes on climate change, failure to match her words  with action is likely to be as politically fatal to Gillard as it was to Rudd. 