Every day, governments give away an estimated two billion  dollars of taxpayer money to the fossil fuel industry.  This  unmatched largesse to a highly profitable sector by countries  verging on bankruptcy or unable to feed large numbers of their  own people is 'complete madness', according to many experts. In Toronto Sunday, at the conclusion of G20 summit,  countries agreed the madness must be constrained if not  stopped. 'I was impressed.  I think the commitment to phase out fossil  fuel subsidies has finally arrived,' said Mark Halle,  director of trade and investment at the International  Institute for Sustainable Development (IISD) European office  in Geneva. 'With countries committed to cutting their deficits, it is  hard to ignore giving billions of real money away to the  fossil fuel industry or to keep fuel prices low,' Halle said  in an interview. The two-billion-dollars-a-day public subsidy for carbon- based fuels is a very conservative estimate based on the  extensive research conducted by the IISD's Global Subsidies  Initiative, said Halle.  Not only do such huge subsidies  undermine policies on energy efficiency, they make it  impossible for alternative energy sources to compete, he  said. 'We can't make the transition to low-carbon economies nor  can the energy playing field be leveled without the  elimination of fossil fuels.  And time for that has finally  come,' he said. Others are less optimistic given the G8 and G20 track record  for broken promises. 'It (the G20 commitment) fell short of vision and courage  that is expected from global leaders in the light of the  disastrous oil spill' in the Gulf of Mexico, said Darek  Urbaniak of Friends of the Earth Europe.  Urbaniak noted that  BP, the company responsible for the spill, receives British  and EU public subsidies. Countries such as Canada and Australia sought to weaken the  G20 commitment by making commitments voluntary, he said, but  the U. S.  stepped up and pushed for a stronger agreement.   However, do-nothing clauses remain part of the agreement.  It  says that countries agree to phase out 'inefficient fossil  fuel subsidies' but each country decides what those are.   Some countries like Japan, Australia, Italy and others have  already said they don't have any. 'Australia wants to protect its coal mining sector . . . Canada  wants to keep on going with its own subsidies to the tar  sands — an environmental and climate disaster in the league  of the BP oil spill only in slow motion,' Urbaniak told IPS. 'Our research shows that in the last two years Canada was  spending as much on oil and gas subsidies as on climate  programmes,' said Albert Koehl of Ecojustice, a Canadian  environmental NGO. 'Taxpayers won’t be amused to find out that government  spending on climate change is being nullified by spending on  oil and gas subsidies,' Koehl told IPS. He notes that Canada is now investing new billions of  dollars into developing carbon capture and storage (CCS)  technology for the fossil fuel sector and primarily the  enormous Alberta tar sands operations.  'CCS a new way of  massively subsidising the oil and gas industry, especially  the tar sands,' he said. Most industrialised countries subsidise oil, coal and  natural gas production to reduce the cost of finding and  producing oil for oil companies.  Countries in the developing  world subsidise the cost of buying fuel to the public.   Experts agree that both forms of subsidies encourage  consumption of fossil fuels and thus increase the price of  oil. U. S.  President Barack Obama put these subsidies on the  chopping block at the previous G20 summit in Pittsburgh last  September.  The Obama administration is looking for ways to  cut its ballooning deficit and thinks taking three or four  billion away from fossil fuel companies is achievable, said  Halle. Many other countries are now paying attention to their  subsidies, seeing it as money they could put to much better  use without increasing their deficits.  India, China,  Malaysia and others have cut their consumption subsidies, he  said.  However, this has to be done carefully and over time.   While the poor are used to justify keeping fuel prices low,  that only applies to heating and lighting fuels.  The bulk of  subsidies go to transportation fuels which benefits the  middle class. 'Subsidy reduction is a new area for everyone and countries  have to go carefully,' Halle said. Since subsidies are deeply entrenched and difficult to get  rid of, the G20 commitment provides an excuse and leverage  needed in many countries to enact reforms, said Halle.   'We've spoken to half of the G20 countries and they hadn't  really thought the issue through.  Now they are seeing some  opportunities. 'In addition to the G20, six or seven non-members have formed  a 'Friends of Fossil Fuel Subsidy Reform' group to follow  the same commitments.  And the G20 did agree to have some  plans for action in place for their next meeting in November  this year. There are an awful lot things that could be done with that  annual expenditure of 700 to 800 billion dollars in fossil  fuel subsidies and countries are really beginning to think  about that, Halle said.  'The momentum for change is building  but it still needs to grow. '