Caribbean Community (Caricom) leaders are gathering here next  week for their annual summit still struggling to recover from  the two-year global economic and financial crisis that has  taken a major toll on their individual economies. Especially hard hit have been the tourism industry and  remittances from abroad.  The Guyana-based Caricom  Secretariat says that at least half of the 15-member  grouping will record either zero or negative growth this  year, while high unemployment and other factors are likely  to exacerbate the situation. 'This state of affairs cannot be separated from our  continuing major social problems related to crime and  security,' Caricom Secretary-General Edwin Carrington told  reporters ahead of the Jul.  4-7 event. His economic adviser, Dr.  Maurice Odle, added that a looming  debt crisis and the oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico would  also be on the agenda.  Caricom countries have been working towards a Single Market  and Economy (CSME) by the year 2015, but the initiative has  suffered several setbacks. 'The goalpost on CSME inauguration keeps shifting as a  number of member states continue to falter in honouring  their pledges to close the yawning gaps on implementation of  treaty-based policies and programmes,' says veteran  Caribbean journalist Rickey Singh. St.  Vincent and the Grenadines Prime Minister Dr.  Ralph  Gonsalves, a stalwart of the integration process, said he  believes that Caricom could learn from the progress being  made by the sub-regional Organisation of Eastern Caribbean  States (OECS), which recently signed a treaty establishing  an economic union among themselves that provides for  improved governance and deeper cooperation among member  states. Carrington believes that this weekend's summit, which  coincides with Caricom's 37th anniversary, will provide the  impetus 'as we embark on the second decade of the new  millennium'. The meeting will no doubt be dominated by issues such as the  Economic Partnership Agreement (EPA) that the Caribbean  signed with European nearly two years ago, negotiations with  Canada for a new trade and development accord, and way to  strengthen relations with the United States. The outgoing Caricom chair and prime minister of Dominica,  Roosevelt Skerrit, said that in the past 'there has not been  sufficient political dialogue' with Washington. 'We are receptive to dialogue and President Obama has  recognised that and he is taking a different approach to the  Caribbean,' Skerrit said. The Barack Obama administration pledged 45 million dollars  to the region this year under the Caribbean Basin Security  Initiative.  In April, Secretary of Defence Robert Gates made  a further commitment of 79 million dollars for the security  initiative for next year. Following a 90-minute meeting with Caribbean leaders in  Barbados earlier this month, Secretary of State Hillary  Clinton also announced that the region was in line to  receive a further 170 million dollars in funding for  HIV/AIDS and climate change programmes.  Caricom has also sought to deepen its relations with its  Latin American neighbours through Brazil and the Community  of Latin American and Caribbean States (CALC) as well as the  Bolivarian Alternative for the Americas (ALBA) and UNASUR. The catastrophic January earthquake in Haiti and the pending  presidential and legislative elections there are also  matters that the regional leaders will have to deal with  during their Montego Bay summit. Carrington said that the reconstruction of the only French- speaking member of Caricom has been a major focus and  'demands that we all pitch in to bolster the efforts of the  Haitian people'. But, like the international donor community, Caricom is  fearful that the arrival of the hurricane and rainy seasons  could seriously hamper efforts to rebuild a country where  more than a million people became homeless following the  Jan.  12 earthquake that killed an estimated 300,000 people. Haitian President René Préval this week announced that the  elections will take place on Nov.  28 and he intends to step  down in keeping with the constitutional deadline of Feb.  7  even though the parliament recently approved an extension of  that date to May. Climate change issues, particularly as the region gears up  to attend a major meeting in Cancun, Mexico in November,  will also be a major talking point here, given the outcome  of the Copenhagen conference last December. 'Every step must be taken by the region to prepare for that  meeting to ensure that the results, in particular the  maximum rise in global temperature, do not exceed 1. 5  degrees,' said Carrington. 'The region's mantra of '1. 5 to stay alive' is not a mere  slogan for our islands and low-lying coastal states.  Its  achievement is vital for our very survival,' he told  reporters. The four-day summit will also be the first opportunity for  Kamla Persad Bissessar, the first ever woman prime minister  of Trinidad and Tobago, to interact with her regional  colleagues since her May 24 general election victory. 