With the U. S . government and oil giant British Petroleum under  fire for their handling of the more than two-month-old Gulf  Coast oil spill disaster, environmental and community  activists across the country are taking matters into their own  hands. In New Orleans, a Gulf Emergency Summit was held to design a  grassroots response to the crisis on Jun.  19, resulting in  the launch of the 'Emergency Committee to Stop the Gulf Oil  Catastrophe'. 'We're organising a broad resistance,' Larry Everest, a  spokesperson for the committee from San Francisco,  California, who traveled to the Gulf after the disaster,  told IPS.  'The goal of the summit flowed from the call we put out, a  recognition of the enormity of the catastrophe. . .  and  recognising that the disaster is out of control and  spreading and BP and the government have shown they are  unable and unwilling to stop the disaster and protect the  environment or even tell the truth,' Everest said. Some 35,000 to 60,000 barrels of oil are estimated to be  leaking in the Gulf every day.  BP says it is collecting  23,000 to 25,000 barrels. The Gulf Emergency Summit included about 100 activists from  around the country, particularly the U. S.  south, as well as  many from New Orleans where the meeting was held.   Organisations represented included public housing advocacy  organisations like C3-Hands off Iberville, Survivors  Village, World Can't Wait, the Lower Algiers Environmental  Committee, Pax Christi, and Women United for Social Justice. 'We're calling for people coming together and fighting and  organising and demanding the truth and that everything be  done to stop this catastrophe.  We're organising mass  independent actions that are not subservient to or within  the framework of the issue as defined by BP and the  government,' Everest said. 'They [BP and the government] have been taking out ads,  holding meetings, they're on TV daily telling the population  that everything is being done that should be done, that  everyone should follow their lead.  This is a lie.  They're  not informing people of the full scope of this horror  either,' Everest said. Two actions have been held so far in New Orleans as a result  of the Summit.  First, two days after the Summit, about 25  activists protested at the United Command in New Orleans.   The protesters presented a BP official with their list of  demands.  The BP official wouldn't even identify himself to  the protesters, Everest said. Two days after that, Emergency Committee activists attended  one of BP's Open Houses for the public, again presented  their demands, and demanded that BP answer questions.  In the period shortly after the Apr.  20 explosion on the  Deepwater Horizon oil rig, BP representatives would answer  questions from citizens at their forums, Everest said.   However, BP changed the format after they were 'crucified by  members of the public' and now company spokespersons give  short prepared statements and allow members of the public to  visit informational tables. The Emergency Committee demanded that BP answer questions  publicly, not one-on-one, and BP gave in, answering  questions at least at that forum for about 40 minutes,  Everest said.  'They're trying to prevent collective mass consciousness and  actions.  It's major PR [public relations] and damage  control. . .  These open house meetings are propaganda and  disinformation sessions, that 'everything is being done' and  'we're so sorry'.  They're cover-ups,' Everest said. In addition, activists have been holding protests across the  country in cities not directly impacted by the oil spill. One day of national protests, referred to as 'Crude  Awakening', was called on Jun.  19 by Code Pink and the  Sierra Club. In Atlanta, a dozen protesters gathered at a midtown BP gas  station.  Many of the protesters were young people  unaffiliated with any organisation.  Others were members of  the Revolutionary Communist Party, which also sent many  representatives to the Summit. 'We're here to protest BP and the crimes they continue to be  perpetrating against all living things in the Gulf Coast  region and the U. S. ,' said Carol Coney, an organiser of the  local protest.  'It's an assault on our country -  environmental and economic terrorism. 'People in the U. S.  'who have any kind of heart for working  people and creatures that live in the ocean, all of us are  heartbroken by what has happened and what is still  happening', Coney said. 'I think BP has done a great disservice to humanity.  This is  a f**king disaster and I think BP needs to be held solely  responsible for the cleanup effort,' said Oliver Howington,  a protester and transgender activist. 'This is an excellent example of how corporations and  government work together to make environmental disasters  like this possible,' Howington said.  'The government let  them have all this deregulation and [won't] impose limits or  caps. 'Activists held signs that said 'Save Our Sea Critters' and  'We Demand Alternative Energy Now'. An estimated 100,000 activists around the world also held a  'Hands Across the Sand' action on Jun.  26, in which people  held hands along beaches in opposition to offshore oil  drilling, from 12:00 to 12:15 in their local time zone.  'Originally intended as a local event, Hands Across the Sand  went international with events held in: Australia,  Bangladesh, Brazil, Belize, Canada, Costa Rica, Germany,  Denmark, Dominican Republic, Spain, France, United Kingdom,  Greenland, Croatia, Ireland, India, Italy, Japan, South  Korea, Lebanon, Mexico, Malaysia, Nicaragua, Netherlands,  Norway, New Zealand, Panama, Peru, Poland, Sweden, Tanzania,  and South Africa,' according to the Surfrider Foundation.  