Pluspetrol's Jun.  19 petroleum spill has left the Marañón River, in the Peruvian  Amazon, with oil and grease levels thousands of times greater than the  maximum allowed for human consumption, affecting more than 4,000 local  residents. 'The oil slick covered the entire width of the Marañón River, with devastating  effects for flora and fauna.  Fish and aquatic plants have been destroyed,'  states the report by chemical engineer Víctor Sotero, of the government's  Peruvian Amazon Research Institute (IIAP), connected to the Ministry of  Environment. IPS obtained access to the report and to the laboratory test results of the spill  that occurred Jun.  19 in the northeastern region of Loreto, when the hull of a  barge transporting crude oil ruptured, releasing about 400 barrels (159 litres  per barrel) of the oil into the river. The shipment came from Lot 8, under a contract held by the Pluspetrol Norte  company, an affiliate of the Argentina-based Pluspetrol corporation. Analysis of six water samples collected between Jun.  20 and 22 in the  affected area revealed grease and oil levels ranging between 10,800 and  2,613,000 milligrams per litre (mg/l). The results are alarming, considering that the maximum admissible for  human consumption of oil-tainted water is 1. 0 mg/l, or one part per million,  according to Peruvian law. 'With that degree of contamination, those waters cannot be utilised by the  local populations until new tests are conducted over the course of the next  few months and the presence of these substances falls to zero,' Sotero told  IPS. The spill affects 28 river communities on the Marañón -- more than 4,000  people --, according to Peru's ombudsman office, Defensoría del Pueblo.   Among them are the indigenous Cocama and Achuar peoples.  'Our brothers are demanding clean water and food.  They used to take water  from this river and eat its fish, which have gone because of the spill,' said  Edwin Vásquez, president of the Indigenous Organisation of the East.  He said  the water and supplies that Pluspetrol and the Loreto government have  distributed are not enough. The analysis made by the IIAP's Bioactive Substances Laboratory shows that  the first riverwater sample, taken Jun.  20 in the community of Santa Rita de  Castilla, the day after the incident, had the highest concentration of oils:  2,613,000 mg/l.  'It was practically all petroleum,' said Sotero. The Jun.  21 sample was 32,900 mg/l grease and oil.  Members of the  community collected those first two samples, because it took Sotero two days  to reach the site, on Jun.  22, when he took four additional samples from  different sites. In the community of Saramuro, located in the spill's 'ground zero' area,  samples showed as much as 11,000 mg/l, and 100 metres upriver it reached  11,300 mg/l. The two other sites that Sotero inspected, 500 metres downriver from ground  zero, registered 10,900 mg/l and 10,800 mg/l.  The latter was taken at Santa  Rita de Castilla. The chemical engineer also tested the water's pH, or the degree of acidity,  and found 'very little increase if compared with the maximum limit allowed.   The high degree of contamination is from the oils and greases,' said Sotero. The crude oil accumulated principally in the inlets and along the banks of the  Marañón, a tributary of the Amazon, said the IIAP expert, who also noted that  the oil company does not have 'a contingency plan for the river population  when a disaster like this occurs. ' In a statement, Pluspetrol said it does indeed have such a plan.  But Sotero  insisted that the company had never shown it to him. He stated in his report that the local population only found out about the  accident on Saturday night, Jun.  19, though the spill had happened at about  3:00 in the afternoon, which meant they had consumed contaminated water  for several hours. The Loreto regional director for energy and mines, Roy Meza, told IPS that  medical teams had been sent to the communities and that two people had  been found to have stomach problems, but it hadn't been confirmed that they  were the result of consuming toxic agents. On Jun.  30, the oil company reported that it had completed the oil recovery  and clean-up operations. In his report, Sotero recommends 'monthly monitoring over the course of the  year, and annually after 2010, of water, sediments, hydrobiological species  and blood of the population affected, in order to assess the scope of the  contamination. 'The Regional Health Directorate is also analysing water samples from the  area, but has yet to publish its results. According to Energy and Mines Minister Pedro Sánchez, the quantity of oil  spilled is very small in comparison to the disaster off the U. S.  coast in the  Gulf of Mexico, where an oil-drilling platform of the transnational British  Petroleum collapsed. Indigenous leader Vásquez took issue with making such a comparison, and  asked the government 'not to minimise the incident' and to investigate it  rigorously 'so that those responsible can be sanctioned. 'The indigenous communities in Peru have become painfully aware of the  potential harm from intense petroleum and mining activities.  Two rivers were contaminated when the Caudalosa mining company's  reservoir of toxic waste collapsed in Huancavelica, the country's poorest  region, located in the southern Andes. That incident took place on Jun.  25 and, according to representatives of the  Huachocolpa community, some 21,000 cubic metres of mining waste were  spilled. Environment Minister Antonio Brack has assured there will be penalties for  the responsible parties in both cases. However, the petroleum and mining companies usually challenge any  sanctions the government imposes. According to a report from the Peruvian investigative journalism project IDL- Reporteros, just 22 percent of the fines imposed for serious incidents of  contamination or for serious safety violations from 2007 to April 2010 were  collected. The sum of the fines imposed in that period but not collected by the Peruvian  government surpasses 13 million dollars. Iván Lanegra, an ombudsman official with the Defensoría del Pueblo, told IPS  he believes there should be a coordinated effort amongst the government  agencies to investigate what happened and provide for the urgent needs of  the people affected.  