'I cut down all of that section,' said Esteban Martínez as he pointed to a  rectangle of land cleared of trees in the central Mexican state of Querétaro. 'I used to go after the jaguars that killed my livestock. . .  and yes, I killed one.   But now we protect them.  For me, it is no longer worth it to harm the forest,'  said Martínez. From a lookout point on the hill, he explained how 16 residents of the San  Juan de los Durán 'ejido,' a communally owned rural estate, traded  subsistence farming for an eco-tourism project in which they run  a  campground for visitors interested in nature.  The community is situated within the Sierra Gorda Biosphere Reserve, in the  northern portion of Querétaro.  Covering 384,000 hectares, one-third of Querétaro, the reserve is home to a  great variety of ecosystems, with altitudes ranging from 350 metres to 3,100  metres above sea level: semi-desert, cloud forest, temperate forest and  lowland jungles, among others. There are 360 species of birds, 130 mammals (including six felines, like the  endangered jaguar), 71 reptiles, 23 amphibians and 2,308 plant species. The zone was recovered thanks to the efforts of Martha Ruiz Corzo, a music  teacher, and of Roberto Pedraza Muñoz, her husband and public accountant.   Together they founded the Sierra Gorda Ecological Group, in 1987, entrusted  with managing the reserve.  The work of 23 years, which included the entire family, won support from  private foundations and international agencies, like the Global Environment  Facility (GEF), which through the United Nations Development Programme  (UNDP) provided 6. 7 million dollars from 2001 to 2009. Local efforts led to matching funds of four dollars for each dollar from GEF to  implement a protected area management model involving both government  and civil society -- an approach that is unique in Mexico. Thanks to the non-governmental organisation Bosque Sustentable  (Sustainable Forest), an affiliate of the Sierra Gorda Ecological Group,  international credits for more than 28,000 tonnes of carbon dioxide -- the  leading greenhouse-effect gas -- were put on the international carbon  market.  That sum is the estimated amount of additional CO2 absorbed by  reforestation of degraded forests. The revenue is earmarked to finance Sustainable Forest projects, but the aim  is to use the money to pay local communities for protecting the area. The team led by Ruiz Corzo, director of the reserve, is developing units of  Social Return on Investment (SROI), which combine economic, social and  environmental indicators to estimate the economic benefits of the actions  taken. The aim is to create 'stock market certificates for planetary health,' which  include the protection of biodiversity and fighting against poverty, Ruiz Corzo  told this reporter. 'We need the local people to receive payment for conservation,' she added,  going on to explain that it requires creating an alliance with the communities  living in extreme poverty.  'How are we going to ask them to maintain and  conserve the environment when they are among the worst off in the world?'The shifts in recent years of rain and drought patterns led to onslaughts of  plant and insect pests, affecting the encino (of the oak family), junipers and  10 species of pine across 27,000 hectares -- one-third of the forest in the  reserve. 'The trees are weakened by climate stress,' said Roberto Pedraza Ruiz, the  reserve's chief technician -- Martha and Roberto's son. Pests are not the only threat in the Sierra Gorda, which the federal  government declared a protected area in 1997 and UNESCO (UN Educational,  Scientific and Cultural Organisation) proclaimed a World Biosphere Reserve in  2001. For the past four years the Federal Electricity Commissions (CFE) has been  trying to buy up land, including the ejidos, to erect 47. 5 kilometres of  transmission lines to convey electricity from San Luis Potosí to Guanajuato --  both are neighbouring states of Querétaro. 'The consequences would be incalculable,' warned Pedraza.  'For starters, one  out of three amphibian species would be at risk. 'The law on natural protected areas prohibits electrical transmission lines in  those zones.  But the CFE has twice insisted with its proposal, rejected by the  Sierra Gorda administration.  However, members of the Citizen Council of the Sierra Gorda report that CFE  representatives continue trying to buy land, and have even paid for some lots. In Mexico, more than half the population of 107 million lives on less than five  dollars a day.  Despite the fact that 80 percent of the forests is held as ejidos,  or communal property, ownership is not well documented, and most lots are  too small to appeal to global markets. As a result, in Sierra Gorda, only a few of the communal properties receive  payment for the environmental services they provide, and it ranges between  18 and 27 dollars annually per hectare conserved. The overarching goal is for the residents of the Sierra to replace timber  production, ranching and farming -- the region's only economic activities --  with provision of environmental services.  To that end, a state fund has been proposed that would pay compensation to  landowners for the ecosystem services of their forests and jungles. 'We need them to get the cattle out of the forest, to maintain water sources  for the fauna, to clean up the pests and to maintain active civilian  monitoring,' said Mario Pedraza Ruiz, assistant director of Sustainable Forest  and expert in environmentally friendly livestock methods. The youngest in the Pedraza Ruiz family is convinced that conservation and  cattle ranching are compatible. 'You confine the animals, they produce manure, and with your feet you break  up the crust of soil that has been flattened by their step, you scrape and you  plough, and they don't return to that terrain until it has recovered,' he  explained. Two communities, Landa de Matamoros and Arroyo Seco, have begun  controlled pasturing using electric fences, which also allows forage plants to  recover. They are also developing hydroponic forage, which is grown in water, without  soil. 'The cattle are part of the cultural mindset' of the community members, said  Mario Pedraza, 'even if they have only two skinny cows. . .  It's impossible to  change the mentality,' and in those cases the project does the best it can,  within those limits. *This story is part of a series of features on biodiversity by Inter Press Service  (IPS), CGIAR/Biodiversity International, International Federation of  Environmental Journalists (IFEJ), United Nations Environment  Programme/Convention on Biological Diversity - members of the Alliance of  Communicators for Sustainable Development (COM+ -  www. complusalliance. org).  