Amidst criticism and applause from environmentalists and experts, a  programme is emerging in Germany to expand the total area covered by forests  -- to as much as five percent of national territory.  The debate centres on just  how much human intervention there should be. The programme of the German Federal Agency for Nature Conservation  (known as BfN for the agency's original name) has a goal for 2020 to multiply  10-fold the forested areas, an estimated 194,000 hectares with relatively  little impact from human activities. 'The areas that can be considered natural forest are centred in the 14  national parks,' distributed around the country, BfN president Beate Jessel  told Tierramérica. The main argument in defence of the plan, launched in June in support of the  International Year of Biodiversity, is that the current area is very small in  comparison with the nature parks of Great Britain, for example, which cover  more than eight percent of national territory. The 'old growth' forests began to decline in European countries beginning  with industrialisation more than 200 years ago, a process that accelerated in  the mid-20th century. The disappearance of those original ecosystems is most evident along the  banks of rivers, most of which have been channelled, or in coastal regions,  due to the construction of dikes and other modes of protecting human  settlements and farmland from the tides. Even the forests that remain relatively intact in the heart of the national parks  show some big differences with respect to the original European forest. Only in the Nordic countries and in parts of Eastern Europe do extensive  natural areas subsist, and experts consider them essential for protecting  biodiversity and serving as a buffer against the effects of climate change,  because they can be used to recreate the environment as it was before  human impacts. 'They are very useful as spaces of comparison and for studying the natural  dynamic of evolution.  We can draw lessons from them to put into practice in a  future policy of environmental protection,' said Jessel. The International Union for the Conservation of Nature (IUCN) defines natural  forests as extensive areas that have maintained their original characteristics,  and in which great biodiversity prevails. Jessel commented that Germany should have the courage to 'let nature reign  again in broad areas of its territory. 'However, some environmentalists doubt that concepts like 'natural forest'  and 'wilderness' are useful for protecting biodiversity.  'That logic isn't completely false, but it hides the fact that human  intervention with the intent of environmental protection also essentially  contributes to the same goals,' Gisela Kangler, ecology professor at the  Technical University of Munich, told Tierramérica. In the protected areas, human intervention prevents particularly harmful  species from turning into plagues that would naturally destroy the ecological  balance of the forest.  That means the balance is artificially maintained, but is  better than the alternative, she said. The problem is common in wild areas.  In the 1980s, the proliferation of  beetles nearly destroyed the central region of the Bavarian Forest National  Park, founded in 1967.  The onslaught forced local authorities to take action,  even against their initial intentions.  BfN ecologists are open to the option of human intervention.  Axel Ssymank,  an expert in biotopes and landscape ecology, told Tierramérica that many  non-forest regions today serve as the new habitat for species expelled as  cities and farmland expanded. 'Such areas should be protected and the forest should not be allowed to take  over,' or else it would naturally destroy the new ecosystem, said Ssymank.   'The German forest today would be 80 to 90 percent beech trees if our  ancestors had not diversified it for economic reasons,' he added. In Ssymank's view, society 'should intentionally develop the natural forest. '  The demographic evolution of some German regions could be an element in  favour of such development of nature, even if it is artificial, he said. A report on the demographic changes in the northeastern federal state of  Brandenburg, by the private Berlin Institute for Population and Development,  proposes providing incentives for the local residents to move to other areas  so that nature can take its course. In this district in Berlin's outskirts, what was once an industrial zone of the  former East Germany is now an area of poverty and unemployment --  reaching 11. 1 percent.  The scant opportunities for economic development  have fed emigration from the area, leaving just 86 inhabitants per square  kilometre. Given situations like Brandenburg, 'the government should guide the  reduction of human population to benefit nature,' according to Reiner  Klingholz, author of the report. Klingholz said in a conversation with Tierramérica, 'It is not even necessary to  dismantle the abandoned cities and industrialised areas, because the  deserted buildings are -- in certain ecosystem situations -- more varied than  a pine forest. ' However, the authorities of German municipalities in decay continue to insist  on subsidising industry, commerce and residents, offering tax exemptions  and extensive urbanised areas that, according to environmentalists, could be  abandoned to nature. (*This story was originally published by Latin American newspapers that are  part of the Tierramérica network.  Tierramérica is a specialised news service  produced by IPS with the backing of the United Nations Development  Programme, United Nations Environment Programme and the World Bank. ) 