The bicycle has many attractions as a form of personal  transportation.  It alleviates congestion, lowers air  pollution, reduces obesity, increases physical fitness, does  not emit climate-disrupting carbon dioxide, and is priced  within the reach of the billions of people who cannot afford a  car. Bicycles increase mobility while reducing congestion and the  area of land paved over.  Six bicycles can typically fit into  the road space used by one car.  For parking, the advantage  is even greater, with 20 bicycles occupying the space  required to park a car. Few methods of reducing carbon emissions are as effective as  substituting a bicycle for a car on short trips.  A bicycle  is a marvel of engineering efficiency, one where an  investment in 22 pounds of metal and rubber boosts the  efficiency of individual mobility by a factor of three. The bicycle is not only a flexible means of transportation;  it is ideal in restoring a balance between caloric intake  and expenditure.  Regular exercise of the sort provided by  cycling to work reduces cardiovascular disease,  osteoporosis, and arthritis, and it strengthens the immune  system.  World bicycle production, averaging 94 million per year from  1990 to 2002, climbed to 130 million in 2007, far  outstripping automobile production of 70 million.  Bicycle  sales in some markets are surging as governments devise a  myriad of incentives to encourage bicycle use.  For example,  in 2009 the Italian government began a hefty incentive  programme to encourage the purchase of bicycles or electric  bikes in order to improve urban air quality and reduce the  number of cars on the road.  The direct payments will cover  up to 30 percent of the cost of the bicycle. China, with 430 million bikes, has the world's largest  fleet, but ownership rates are higher in Europe.  The  Netherlands has more than one bike per person, while Denmark  and Germany have just under one bike per person. China dramatically demonstrated the capacity of the bicycle  to provide mobility for low-income populations.  In 1976,  this country produced six million bicycles.  After the  reforms in 1978 that led to an open market economy and  rapidly rising incomes, bicycle production started climbing,  reaching nearly 90 million in 2007. The surge to 430 million bicycle owners in China has  provided the greatest increase in mobility in history.   Bicycles took over rural roads and city streets.  Although  China's rapidly multiplying passenger cars and the urban  congestion they cause get a lot of attention, it is bicycles  that provide personal mobility for hundreds of millions of  Chinese. Among the industrial-country leaders in designing bicycle- friendly transport systems are the Netherlands, where 27  percent of all trips are by bike, Denmark with 18 percent,  and Germany, 10 percent.  By contrast, the United States and  Britain are each at 1 percent. An excellent study by John Pucher and Ralph Buehler at  Rutgers University analysed the reasons for these wide  disparities among countries.  They note that 'extensive  cycling rights-of-way in the Netherlands, Denmark, and  Germany are complemented by ample bike parking, full  integration with public transport, comprehensive traffic  education and training of both cyclists and motorists. 'These countries, they point out, 'make driving expensive as  well as inconvenient in central cities through a host of  taxes and restrictions on car ownership, use and parking. …  It is the coordinated implementation of this multi-faceted,  mutually reinforcing set of policies that best explains the  success of these three countries in promoting cycling. ' And  it is the lack of these policies, they note, that explains  'the marginal status of cycling in the UK and USA'. The Netherlands, the unquestioned leader among industrial  countries in encouraging bicycle use, has incorporated a  vision of the role of bicycles into a Bicycle Master Plan.   In addition to creating bike lanes and trails in all its  cities, the system also often gives cyclists the advantage  over motorists in right-of-way and at traffic lights.  Some  traffic signals permit cyclists to move out before cars.  By  2007, Amsterdam had become the first western industrial city  where the number of trips taken by bicycle exceeded those  taken by car. Within the Netherlands, a nongovernmental group called  Interface for Cycling Expertise (I-ce) has been formed to  share the Dutch experience in designing a modern transport  system that prominently features bicycles.  It is working  with groups in Botswana, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Ecuador,  Ghana, India, Kenya, Peru, South Africa, and Uganda to  facilitate bicycle use. Sales of electric bicycles, a relatively new genre of  transport vehicles, also have taken off.  E-bikes are similar  to plug-in hybrid cars in that they are powered by two  sources - in this case muscle and battery power - and can be  plugged into the grid for recharging as needed. In China, where this technology came into its own, sales  climbed from 40,000 e-bikes in 1998 to 21 million in 2008.   China had close to 100 million electric bicycles on the road  that year, compared with 18 million cars.  These e-bikes are  now attracting attention in other Asian countries similarly  plagued with air pollution and in the United States and  Europe, where combined sales now exceed 300,000 per year. In contrast to plug-in hybrid cars, electric bikes do not  directly use any fossil fuel.  If we can make the transition  from coal-fired power plants to wind, solar, and geothermal  power, then electrically powered bicycles can also operate  fossil-fuel-free. Above all, the key to realising the potential of the bicycle  is to create bicycle-friendly transport systems.  This means  providing bicycle trails and designated street lanes for  bicycles, designed to serve both commuters and people biking  for recreation, and making bike parking facilities and  showers available at workplaces.  This simple bicycle is a  winner in the Plan B economy.  *Lester R.  Brown is founder and president of the Earth  Policy Institute.  This article is excerpted from Chapter 6,  'Designing Cities for People' in Brown's 'Plan B 4. 0:  Mobilizing to Save Civilisation' (New York: W. W.  Norton &  Company, 2009), available on-line at  www. earthpolicy. org/index. php?/books/pb4. 