The Mozambican government has adopted various policies to address the effects  of climate change, with special attention to women as studies show that they are  more adversely affected by this phenomenon. The south-east African country, with its coastline of 2,700 km stretching  along the Indian Ocean, has increasingly been subjected to environmental  disasters over the past decade.  The government’s policies aim to reduce the number of victims and the loss  of property; developing a culture of disaster prevention; and developing the  means to mitigate and prevent disasters.  It also aims to boost environmental  management.  The policies have a particular gender focus. One such policy is the ministry for coordination of the environment’s national  adaptation programme of action (NAPA), developed as part of the United  Nations (UN) initiative to assist least developed countries in coping with  climate change.  Projects are prioritised that will assist Mozambique in buffering itself against  adverse environmental effects.  These projects are recommended for funding  under the Global Environment Facility of the UN.  'Most women, about 73 percent, work the land in Mozambique and are  therefore hard hit by the effects of climate change,' according to William  Antonio Ndlovu, programme officer with the Maputo-based Diakonia  Mozambique, in an interview with IPS.  He stressed that more should be done  to assist women. Diakonia Mozambique is a Christian development organisation working  towards sustainable improvement in the living conditions of vulnerable  people. Julio Fernando of the Christian Council of Mozambique told IPS that the  effects of climate change represent a growing threat to livelihoods in his  country.  'Many Mozambicans are at risk but women are affected more.  This is  mainly because of poor responsive measures,' said Fernando. The Christian Council of Mozambique is part of a network of faith-based  organisations working on socio-economic issues, among others. Research by the Cape Town-based office of the Heinrich Böll Foundation  Southern Africa confirms that 'women and men are differently impacted upon  by climate changes due to current power relations and their differentiated  roles in these communities,' as Dr.  Natasha Ribeiro, researcher of the study,  put it in the report, titled 'Gender and Climate Change: Mozambique Case  Study', put it. The foundation is associated with the German Green Party. The reasons are that, 'women have access to but not control over natural  resources and other property rights.  Additionally, women do most of the  reproductive and part of the productive work, while men are only responsible  for productive work'.  The study, published earlier in 2010, was conducted in the Gaza province  located in the south of the country.  It focused on the Mapai Ngale, a  community vulnerable to droughts, and Magondzwene, vulnerable to floods  since the year 2000. It was found that droughts, strong winds and environmental degradation  have caused women and men to spend more time working in agriculture to  gain the same or lower yields than in previous years. According to the report, communities are forced to change their way of life  with women taking up more productive work as successive droughts over the  past eight years caused men to look for jobs elsewhere.  Women now work in  alcohol brewing and selling as well as in fisheries. This results in an increased burden on women who still look after the  children, do domestic work and care for people living with AIDS and  tuberculosis.  Men still do not engage in reproductive work. Men’s migration has enhanced women’s participation in decision-making  structures as they are drawn into such structures to fill the gaps left by the  migrating men. Adaptation also involves finding alternative food sources and cultivating dry  season’s vegetables, such as pumpkin, lettuce and tomatoes, all year round.  The study recommends that, due to women’s key role in communities, they  always be considered as the priority group in any activity planned to  ameliorate the effects of climate change.  Special attention should be paid to  women’s representation in decision-making structures and to capacity  building in agriculture as women predominate in this sector. A CARE International report on climate change similarly concluded in 2006  that climate change has the most impact on women in countries such as  Zimbabwe, Malawi, Swaziland and Zambia.  'As the main natural resource  managers, the adverse effects of climate change are likely to be felt  disproportionately by women,' the CARE report concluded.  CARE is an  international relief organisation. According to a Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper (PRSP) developed by the  Mozambican government in 2006, the country is unlikely to meet the  millennium development goals (MDGs) due to the effects of climate change.   This is further made worse by the extreme poverty that already exists in Mozambique. The country has also tried to integrate climate concerns in its Agenda 2025  programme, essentially a development programme that the government of  Mozambique aims to actualise by the year 2025. It also developed a gender strategy for the agrarian sector.  The strategy aims  at creating equal access to resources and opportunities between men and  women.  In addition it urges the implementation of programmes for  diversification of subsistence crops and access to improved technologies,  including agro-processing, in response to climate change. The Böll study praises NAPA and the agrarian strategy as solid instruments  but say that they still need to be implemented.  