Last week, the U. S.  Coast Guard, working in concert with oil  giant BP, instituted new restrictions across the U. S.  Gulf  Coast that prevent the media from coming within 20 metres of  booms or response vessels on beaches or water.  But the  insidiousness of the restrictions runs even deeper. 'You can't come in here,' Don, the security guard hired by  BP, told IPS at the Oiled Wildlife Rehabilitation Center at  Fort Jackson, Louisiana. Inside, the International Bird Rescue Research Center, one  of the companies hired by BP to clean wildlife, works to  wash oiled birds before returning them to the wild. The centre has limited access to the media, and had been  open Mondays, Wednesdays, and Fridays for two hours at a  time.  IPS arrived at the centre on a Wednesday, only to  learn that it had just reduced its media days from three to  two, and was no longer open to the media on Wednesdays. When asked who he worked for, the private security guard  informed IPS, 'I work for HUB, a security company hired by  BP. 'Hub Enterprises out of Broussard, Louisiana has a contract  with BP to provide 'security officers' and 'supervisors'.   Don is being paid somewhere between 13 and 14 dollars an  hour to do his part in helping BP keep a media lid on what  is happening with the largest oil-related environmental  disaster in U. S.  history. Up to 60,000 barrels of oil are still leaking into the Gulf  every day, more than two months after the Apr.  20 explosion  on the BP-operated Deepwater Horizon oil rig. Last week's new media restrictions imposed by the Coast  Guard subject journalists and photographers to as much as a  40,000-dollar fine, and from one to five years in jail as a  class-D felon if they violate the 20-metre rule, that  Unified Command calls a 'safety zone'. There have been many indications of a growing and deepening  media clampdown in the region in other ways as well. Last week, IPS had an interview scheduled with the Louisiana  State University Health Sciences Center in New Orleans.  The  interview was with an individual affiliated with LSU's  research strategies into how the BP oil disaster will affect  the region. The morning the interview was to take place, the interview  subject, who shall remain anonymous, sent IPS an email  stating, 'I have been told to cancel the interview.  I regret  any inconvenience this may have caused you. 'When IPS asked him if there was a reason the interview was  cancelled, he replied, 'No. 'An anonymous source later informed IPS that the decision to  cancel the interview was made by Chancellor Larry Hollier,  who heads the LSU Health Sciences Center. BP is providing the bulk of the funding to be used to study  the effects of the oil disaster, and has promised 500  million dollars for research and restoration projects. Robert Gagosian is president of the Consortium for Ocean  Leadership, which represents ocean research institutions and  aquariums and manages a programme on ocean drilling  research.  A marine geochemist, Gagosian is concerned about  how that money will be spent, and hopes it will be handled  through peer-reviewed grants. His concern, shared by other scientists and researchers,  stems from BP's interest in preserving its business, and  whether the proper criteria will be used in assessing what  research should be done. Jeff Short, a former scientist with the National Oceanic and  Atmospheric Administration who is now with the conservation  group Oceana, said that by having BP pay for the research,  the government cedes control over what studies are to be  conducted. 'I find myself wondering, why would BP want to guide money  into projects that would clearly show much larger  environmental damage than would have come to light  otherwise?' he said. The first 25 million dollars of the BP funds were quickly  distributed to Louisiana State University, the Florida  Institute of Oceanography at the University of South Florida  and a consortium led by Mississippi State University. Many independent scientists and journalists fear this is  part of an effort to influence what studies are conducted  and how willing these public institutions will be to talk to  the media about the BP disaster. In another incident, on Jul.  2, Lance Rosenfield, a  photographer for the non-profit investigative journalism  outlet ProPublica, was briefly detained by police while  shooting pictures near BP's refinery in Texas City, Texas.   According to Rosenfield, he was confronted by a BP security  officer, local police, and a man identifying himself as an  agent of the Department of Homeland Security. Rosenfield was released after police reviewed his photos and  recorded his date of birth, Social Security number and other  personal information.  The police officer then turned this  information over to the BP security guard, under what  Rosenfield said was, according to the police officer,  'standard operating procedure'. There have also been restrictions placed on the airspace  above areas where clean-up and containment operations are  occurring.  The Federal Aviation Administration has placed  restrictions prohibiting media flights below 900 metres over  oil-affected areas. 