An early warning system to alert people living in the lowlands  of the northern Bolivian department of Beni about imminent  flooding of the mighty Mamoré and Ibare rivers is saving  lives, food and goods, and overcoming the uncertainty that led  to enormous losses in the past. 'La gateadora (the crawling flood) is the most dangerous  because it is relentless, and rises stealthily,' César  Cortez, an experienced 72-year-old farmer, told IPS as he  relaxed in the dry season in the main square of San Pedro  Nuevo, 56 kilometres north of Trinidad, the capital of Beni. The rapid advance of floodwaters, known locally as 'la  gateadora', is feared because in a few hours it can  transform the plains into a lake which devours crops,  destroys the flimsy houses and threatens the lives of  defenceless, impoverished local people. The region that is home to some 300 families of Canichana  indigenous people, in the municipality of San Javier,  becomes a gigantic lake in the December to March rainy  season, along with 70 percent of the land in Beni that is  under water for four months of the year. The geography of the department of Beni is uniform: plains  covered with natural pasture and undergrowth, at altitudes  between zero and 154 metres above sea level, huge trees, and  lands divided by the Mamoré and Ibare rivers, which flow  from south to north and empty into the Amazon River. In this endlessly flat landscape with a diversity of plants  and animals, it is hard to tell when the rivers will  overflow their banks.  Even on very sunny days, danger is  close at hand, Nicolás Aradilla, the local magistrate of the  small farming community of Los Bambuses, told IPS. In the old days, the best indicators of imminent flooding  were clouds of mosquitoes descending on population centres,  the appearance of herons, or even alligators coming into the  town square, Cortez said. Other natural signs pointing to the exact level of the  expected flood, such as snakes on the roofs or snail eggs at  a particular height, are no longer widely recognised by  local people. After the worst floods on record, in late 2007 and early  2008, when 165,000 cattle died out of the total Beni herd of  2. 9 million, the United Nations Food and Agriculture  Organisation (FAO) came to the assistance of the hard-hit  farmers with a proposal for an early warning system (EWS). Results were immediate.  In 2009, 78 percent less cattle died  than in 2008, and losses were limited to 35,000 animals. 'There was an urgent need to provide early warnings because  of the regular flooding that happens twice every two years,  with a devastating flood every five years, according to  statistical probability,' the coordinator of the EWS  project, Óscar Mendoza, told IPS. Some 83,035 people, out of the department's total population  of 362,521, benefit directly from the programme, which  covers the municipalities of San Javier, San Andrés, San  Ignacio de Moxos, Santa Ana, San Ramón, Exaltación and  Puerto Siles, all in the Mamoré river basin. A radar on the Grande river, at the border of the  departments of Beni, Cochabamba and Santa Cruz, instantly  sends information to a satellite that in turn beams the  alert warnings to a central office of the National  Meteorology and Hydrology Service (SENAMHI) in the country's  administrative capital, La Paz.  From here the information is transmitted to a Departmental  Early Warning System, and the message is copied to a  computer network serving the municipalities, to announce the  rise in river level and the inevitable flooding that is on  its way. Open frequency radio stations broadcast the warning to the  population so promptly that farmers can immediately build  'chapapas', rough and ready platforms up to two metres above  the ground, to save food, seeds, grains, animals and their  family. The system was used before the last flood, and it put an end  to chaos and the unpleasant surprise of waking to find  household utensils floating in water, Ariel Candia, in  charge of the Risk Unit in the municipality of San Javier,  told IPS. San Javier, located about 30 kilometres north of Trinidad,  is highly vulnerable during the rainy season because of its  proximity to the Mamoré River. Nearly 80 percent of its 19 communities, home to 7,000  Canichana and Sirionó families and covering an area of 8,000  square kilometres, is exposed to sudden flooding. Candia, an agronomist, communicates with local people in  their own language.  To encourage a state of readiness in his  municipality, he recommends making storage platforms and  processing cassava, an abundant local tuber, into 'chivé',  hand-milled flour; cutting it into thin slices to dry; or  simply roasting it over a slow fire, in order to preserve it  for the months to come. Dugout canoes are swiftly converted into food processing  factories for salting and drying meat and making molasses  from sugarcane, just as the earlier inhabitants of this  region used to do. These procedures have also been collected into a manual of  good practices, published by FAO and distributed to the  populations of tropical areas. Antonio Soto, headman and cultural secretary of a Canichana  indigenous organisation representing 300 families, told IPS  he regards the early warning system as very valuable.  He  said that when flood alerts are triggered, a committee will  be formed to organise rescue work to save the food and the  lives of the people he represents. 