'It's unbelievable, the eruption has had a very good effect on the grass,' says  farmer Finnur Tryggvason in Raudafell, just beneath the Eyjafjallajokull glacier  that erupted in April and continued till late May. The ash is thought to keep the soil warm, hence enhancing growth. 'It's like putting fertilizer with potassium and phosphorous on the ground,' he  says.  But it was not an entirely unmixed blessing.  'The species composition  has changed slightly, and some species have disappeared. ' By the end of the eruption, the farm was covered by an ash layer of about 6-8  cm.   'Although the grass is long now, it is a bit sparse.  And there is more angelica  than before,' Tryggvason says.  Some of the ash is still around but grass has  sprung up, and so the ash is not as obvious. Many farmers in the area have already cut the first hay of the summer.   Tryggvason is not one of them.  'I don't think I'll cut any hay this year as it will  be better for the ground if the dead grass forms a layer on top of the ash.  The  nutrients from the ash will then sink into the ground with rain. 'Not far from Raudafell, Olafur Eggertsson has a large farm where he cultivates  various grains and keeps a herd of cows, which he has kept inside since the  eruption.  The ash at his farm, Thorvaldseyri, was coarser than the ash at  Raudafell.  'I ploughed up 38 hectares of land after the eruption and sowed 15 hectares.   The crop looks fine, though we need more rain. 'Asked why his cows are not outside, Eggertsson said 'the weather lately has  been bad, but I will probably let them out later in the summer. 'Fluoride in ash is poisonous to animals, so scientists from the Agricultural  University of Iceland (AUI) are testing fluoride levels in streams, fields, crops  and grass in the area.  One of the researchers is Gudni Thorvaldsson, who also has a hobby farm in  the area.  'We are trying to find out how long it takes for the concentration of  fluoride to decrease.  The levels seem to be decreasing very rapidly, partly due  to growth and partly due to rain,' he says.  'When grass grows, the fluoride is spread over a larger mass and so the  concentration decreases accordingly.  Similarly, when it rains the fluoride is  washed away.  But the weather has been unusually dry since the eruption. 'Thorvaldsson and his colleagues are also looking at the concentration of other  nutrients in grass and crops.  'Even though it is only fluoride that is toxic to  animals, if another nutrient such as phosphorus is present in exceedingly  high amounts, that can have an adverse effect too. 'Gretar Hrafn Hardarson, a vet from the AUI, is examining whether cows eat  ash-covered grass with lust or not.  He and his colleagues are testing the  animals with newly cut hay blended with ash, but Hardarson says it is too  early to make any conclusions.  'The cows seem to be ok about eating the  grass, but whether it is healthy for them is another matter. 'There is no difference in the chemical composition of fine versus coarse ash,  according to Niels Oskarsson from the University of Iceland's Institute of Earth  Sciences.  'The only difference is the surface area. 'Not surprisingly, the volcano brought considerable hardship for farmers in the  area, especially those on the worst-hit farms such as Raudarfell and  Thorvaldseyri.  This year, the Farmers' Association is sending relief workers to  allow exhausted farmers who have livestock to feed the chance to get away  for a few days.  The relief teams will repair fences, feed and milk cows and  carry out general farm duties. Tryggvason will not get any extra help, but a relief farmer has just started at  Thorvaldseyri.  'The relief worker will be with us for a week, and will work as a  normal farmer.  It means my son can get away for that time,' says Eggertsson. Although the volcano is currently quiet -- scientists do not consider an  eruption finished until three months have passed without activity -- ash  deposited during the eruption can still be blown around for years depending  on weather conditions. On the day IPS visited the area, the ash in the air was the worst since the  eruption.  'I think the animals are all right, though,' says Tryggvason, as we sit  inside his house watching the ash swirling around outside.   