The Latin American economy based on exploitation of natural resources does  not create social well-being and is unsustainable in the context of climate  change, says Uruguayan Eduardo Gudynas, lead researcher at the Latin  American Centre for Social Ecology (CLAES). Gudynas, who was in Lima to lead a workshop with the Peruvian Network for  Equitable Globalisation, is one of the contributors to the new report Global  Environmental Outlook for Latin America and the Caribbean (GEO-ALC),  produced by the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP), to be  officially presented later this year. Q: You assert that there is an imbalance in Latin America between the  exploitation of resources and protection of the environment.  How serious is  the problem?  A: Latin America is faced with an environmental emergency, because the pace  of establishing new protected areas and setting up environmental regulations,  for example in the industrial sector, is much slower than the increased pace  of negative impacts from resource extraction. Q: In the context of climate change, is the threat any greater?  A: Much more, not only because of the vulnerability of developing countries,  but also because Latin America isn't taking responsibility.  Always left in the margins is the fact that the region's principal source of  greenhouse gas emissions is deforestation, followed by changes in land use  and agriculture.  As such, discussing climate change means talking about  rural development, agricultural policies and land ownership. But there are economic and political interests that stand in the way.  It is  simpler to propose using energy efficient light bulbs than talk about these  issues. In the international sphere the focus is on the historic responsibility of the  countries of the North for emissions, and requiring compensation from them,  but there is little action in this region to confront climate change and preserve  our ecological heritage. Q: How did we arrive at such a state?   A: Historically it has been argued that the road to development for South  America is the appropriation and extraction of natural resources.  Attention  went to how to do it most efficiently and we missed the opportunity to  diversify the economies in the years of high prices for basic commodities.  That accentuated the focus on raw materials, to the detriment of the  environment, even in countries with strong industry, like Brazil. Q: Which countries in the region are worst off?  A: Brazil is in a critical state because of its nearly complete appropriation of  resources and their impacts.  It is followed by the Andean countries, like Peru  (with big mining projects) and Ecuador (extensive petroleum exploitation). Brazil is already a major mining country, mostly iron and aluminium, and has  a policy to increase that production through low taxation in order to continue  attracting foreign investment.  Most worrisome is that the strategy includes  flexibilising its environmental policies.  Also of concern is the search for  'cheap energy' through hydroelectric dams in the Amazon. Q:  Is 'extractivism' bad in and of itself, or is the problem that the  environmental and social costs are not included?  A: There is global overconsumption of raw materials.  The economic impact of  the social and environmental damages should be taken into account to  evaluate the costs of the productive process, as well as the contribution to  climate change. But these assessments are not done, because if they were the extractive  projects would never be approved. The impacts in the areas where the resources are extracted are ignored, and  that explains why there are conflicts.  It's the paradox of macroeconomic well- being at the cost of local harm. Q: Does this happen in countries governed by political parties of the centre  and right, and of the left?   A: It does.  Although there are substantial differences in the role that the  government plays in the extractivist sector.  In the countries governed by the  left, like Bolivia or Brazil, a portion of the wealth generated by that sector is  used for social programmes as a way to legitimise the policy in order to  continue exploiting the resources. At this point, extractivism, in addition to being a political problem, is a  cultural problem.  It is deeply rooted in the idea that mining and petroleum  are sources of wealth and that they should be exploited as soon as possible. The governments of the left have used that idea to say that they are more  efficient in using the Earth's resources.  But being a cultural problem, it is  reproduced in different political currents.  Q: So how can other alternatives for sustainable development be generated?   A: That is the problem.  Because the idea of extractivism is so widespread,  other possibilities are seen with mistrust or are rejected.  And that is a serious  situation because there are sectors like petroleum that are going to  disappear.  Survival lies on the 'post-extractivist' path.  Q: What role does regional integration play in that path?  A: It plays a fundamental role.  To escape the old approach requires economic  and social coordination among neighbouring countries, even if those  alternatives do not aim to annul the mining or petroleum industries, but  rather to reformulate them.  Q: How can anyone negotiate integration with Brazil without losing? The  energy agreement between Brazil and Peru has undertones of inequality.   A: A prime objective is to reduce the asymmetries among the nations so that  the smallest can have relatively the same level of development as the largest.  Peru shouldn't just sell electricity to Brazil and be left with the environmental  and social damages as well as having to buy Brazilian cars.  They have to find  other ways so that the neighbour advances as well.  (*This story was originally published by Latin American newspapers that are  part of the Tierramérica network.  Tierramérica is a specialised news service  produced by IPS with the backing of the United Nations Development  Programme, United Nations Environment Programme and the World Bank. ) 