A group of 80 students, broken into smaller groups with their  notebooks in tow, troop through the boroughs of New York City  to survey the produce that populates farmers' markets and  grocery stores in their neighbourhoods.  Across the world, a  similar image emerges in Dar es Salaam, Tanzania, where female  students are learning to grow edible mushrooms in their  villages. Students like Vivienne Cain who participate in the Harlem  Children Society's Nutrition and Healthy Living project have  been looking at the cost, appearance and size of the fruits  and vegetables, as well as their availability.  The goal was  to correlate these differences with the neighbourhood's  demographics and socioeconomic status and rates of  nutrition-related disease. The teens discovered that the neighbourhood with the worst  quality produce was Manhattan's Washington Heights, home to  large Hispanic community with a generally low level of  formal education. Fusing her passion for sociology and anthropology, Cain  expressed hope that students could apply the data gathered  to examine the particular areas where obesity is rampant —  altogether, about one in three U. S.  citizens is considered  obese. 'Hopefully we can spread obesity awareness where nutritional  values are lacking,' she told IPS. Meanwhile, the Harlem Children Society (HRC) project in  Tanzania is focused on the growing patterns of mushrooms and  how they can help contribute to the local economy.  Other  students are engaged in social issues that directly affect  their communities — HIV/AIDS, alcoholism and agriculture. Coming from underprivileged households and under-resourced  high schools, these children are now ahead of the curve as  they venture into research projects, fronted by top-ranking  scientists, engineers, mathematicians worldwide.  Most  beneficiaries of the mentorship and internship programmes in  the U. S.  are of African-American (40 percent) and Hispanic  (26 percent) descent, but there also initiatives that engage  Native Americans (16 percent) on reservations. HRC is not-for-profit science programme geared at nurturing  the talents of aspiring scientists, giving students the rare  opportunity of pursuing hands-on research.  This training  ground for future Einsteins and Marie Curies attributes its  humble beginnings to Dr.  Sat Bhattacharya, a molecular  geneticist and cancer research scientist who had a simple  but innovative vision, and started by taking three students  under his wing. The pilot project began in New York and has multiplied to  hosting more than 750 students.  The programme is now  operational in 12 countries, spanning five continents; 350  of its students are from countries such as Mexico, Honduras,  Ethiopia, India and Malaysia. 'I initially thought of just reaching out to people in the  neighbourhood and those who are under-resourced and under- served in the community,' Bhattacharya told IPS.  'But the  concept grew and now there is a huge organisation in  itself. 'Shaveene, one of his early students, is currently studying  nursing at Columbia University.  About 20 percent of HCS  students attend Ivy League schools. He continues to dream big, and is at the stage of planning  for the establishment of a university-type setting that will  act as a support system for HCS students who are entering  post-secondary education.  'There are high drop-out rates, especially for the Hispanic,  African and Native Americans - as high as 60 percent during  the first three years,' he told IPS. Bhattacharya imagines a space where students can continue to  have access to hands-on research and hopes to extend the  programme's reach to include other members of the community  and their parents. Word traveled along the corridors of schools in the Bronx,  Manhattan, Queens, and Brooklyn, where teachers have either  nominated or vouched for students expressing an inclination  towards science.  For Elena Feldman, currently a junior in high school, her  curiosity for science runs in her genes.  Learning about the  programme through her older brother, she said it has helped  her zero in on an ambition: she wants to study mechanical  engineering at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology  (MIT). Rubbing elbows with elite scientists has been a highlight of  the experience for Feldman, where she and her partner  showcased their project and won an award at Sigma Xi, a  scientific research society that meets annually to discuss  new developments in science and technology. The students received some words of wisdom last week from  Nobel Laureate Sidney Altman, a molecular biologist who  studied RNA, at an induction ceremony to celebrate their  involvement in the programme.  'Never give up the habit of  asking questions…there are no stupid questions,' Altman  stressed. HCS is oriented towards applying a community perspective.   Dr.  Rani Roy, the coordinator of the nutrition project,  explained to IPS that, 'The awareness and nutrition  education should first affect their immediate families, and  then the communities with the science fair. 'Every September the urban streets of Harlem are lined with  projects for the science fair and festival, where students'  families and members of the community can get engaged with  the students' work.  'Even professors from college come and they might get  interested in you and your work,' Feldman explained. For the programme to be sustainable, Bhattacharya emphasised  that 'the students should be able to bring it back to their  community. ' He added, 'The most rewarding is when I see  students already giving back. '