The incidence of cardiovascular, respiratory and water-borne diseases is rising  in Uruguay in tandem with climate change, while dengue fever and malaria lurk  at the country's borders.  Higher temperatures are encouraging the presence of  insect vectors carrying diseases that were eradicated decades ago, experts say. Increasingly frequent spells of extreme weather particularly affect the health  of the poorest, who live in overcrowded conditions in precarious dwellings  lacking sanitation, in the shantytowns that have sprung up at an exponential  rate since the 1990s in the Montevideo metropolitan area.  Many of them are  on low-lying land exposed to flooding. Diarrhoea, hepatitis A and leptospirosis are some of the most common  illnesses resulting from flooding and inadequate disposal of human waste,  the head of the Health Ministry's Environmental and Occupational Health  Division, Carmen Ciganda, told IPS. 'These diseases are not exactly caused by climate change, but they are  associated with it and become more prevalent when there are floods or  droughts,' she said.  At the Pereira Rossell Hospital, the country's main  children's hospital, respiratory diseases climbed from 17. 7 percent in 2003  to 23. 3 percent in 2007, and leptospirosis cases increased from 64 in 2006  to 106 in 2007. But Ciganda warned of threats that so far have been kept at bay beyond the  country's borders.  'If our climate becomes more tropical, conditions will be  more favourable for the vectors that transmit diseases like dengue, yellow  fever and malaria,' she said. The average yearly temperature in Uruguay has risen by 0. 8 degrees Celsius  in the last 100 years, and spring and summer average temperatures are now  higher than they were in the early 20th century, while rainfall has become  heavier and more frequent in the last 50 years. In these circumstances, the most vulnerable people are those who live in  shantytowns and have inadequate or absent sewerage systems, and children  and the elderly, who need someone to care for them, as well as those living  along the coast or in areas prone to flooding. Some 300,000 Uruguayans live in the country's 566 shantytowns, 37 percent  of which sprang up in the 1990s, according to studies published last year.   Three-quarters of these informal settlements are on the outskirts of  Montevideo and in adjacent Canelones, two of the 19 departments (provinces)  in this country with 3. 3 million people. An effective barrier   Uruguay is the only Latin American country with no currently reported cases  of autochthonous dengue, caught from local mosquitoes, although there is a  growing epidemic in its nearest neighbours, Argentina, Brazil and Paraguay.   Only isolated cases have occurred, in persons who had visited areas where  the disease is endemic. Nor have there been any cases of malaria, or the yellow fever that ravaged  Montevideo in 1857 and decimated the population of Buenos Aires in 1870. However, in 1997 the state entomological surveillance system found the  mosquito Aedes aegypti, the vector for dengue and yellow fever, had  reappeared in the country after being eliminated in 1958. 'Since 2007, the mosquito has been detected in the capital city.  Longer  summers, and the delayed onset of cold weather (in the southern hemisphere  winter) until late May, mean that the mosquitoes do not go into hibernation  and continue to reproduce for a longer time,' the coordinator of the  Departmental Emergency Committee in Montevideo, Daniel Soria, told IPS. He said frequent heavy rainfall, a result of climate variability, hampers the  struggle to prevent dengue and other diseases entering the country. 'When 50 or 60 millimetres of rainwater falls in less than half an hour, it  overwhelms the sewer system in Montevideo, and people in the shanty towns  suffer most,' he said.  'Flooding of the Miguelete, Pantanoso and Carrasco  rivers, which flow across the city, causes a lot of erosion, so people are  constantly having to be evacuated. 'In Uruguay, nearly 60,000 people were evacuated between 1997 and 2008,  and over half a million were affected in various ways from floods following a  30 percent increase in rainfall.  The trend is expected to worsen in future,  according to official reports. The worst floods since the major deluge in 1959 occurred in May 2007, and  were due to record rainfall, more than five-fold the average for the time of  year. A National Climate Change Response System was created, involving several  ministries. In winter, two hospitals in Montevideo, where 40 percent of Uruguayans live,  act as sentinel hospitals, monitoring patients with hypothermia and the  prevalence of pneumonia and chronic lung diseases. Other sentinel hospitals are at work year-round 'in the northwestern  departments of Artigas, Salto and Paysandú, which have the highest  temperatures and are particularly vulnerable because they are on the border  with Argentina and Brazil,' said Ciganda, adding that there are also more  joint actions with the governments of the neighbouring countries. 'Strengthening the surveillance of specific diseases, setting up sentinel-event  reporting posts, monitoring the vectors, training and raising awareness  among medical health professionals, are some of the actions proposed at the  regional level,' she said. These and other efforts by the health system have found 'no epidemic  outbreaks or prevalence of diseases beyond what is normal for the season,  like respiratory infections' in Durazno, according to María Bocchiardo, the  coordinator of the department's State Health Services Administration (ASSE). In this central Uruguayan department, one of the most heavily affected by  floods, where many people are still evacuated from their homes, there has  been no increase in the number or severity of cases after flooding in late  2009, thanks to the preventive measures, Bocchiardo said.  