The Turkish General Directorate of Forestry claims to devote the bulk of its  resources to combating forest fires, but it is passively observing the Turkish  army ignite forested areas in the country's predominantly Kurdish southeastern  region. Residents of Ikizce and Toptepe, Kurdish villages in Sirnak province not far  from the Iraqi border, tell IPS that they're facing economic disaster and  possibly displacement as Turkish soldiers set fire to their forests and crops.  'The fire started when soldiers from the military base near Ikizce  indiscriminately launched missiles into wooded areas in Cudi mountain,'  shepherd Cem Guney explains.  'Soldiers helped us subdue the flames the  first day, but since then they've done nothing. ''We're sinking as time goes on,' Ikizce village elder Baver Senlik tells IPS.   'Everyday it spreads, grows, becomes more problematic,' he says.  The forest  fire has been burning more than a week now. The Turkish army, which is armed by the U. S.  and some European countries,  claims that the inferno started following clashes between them and the  Kurdistan Workers Party (PKK), the leftist insurgency which demands greater  rights and freedoms for Kurds.  Villagers dispute this, saying there's actually  no fighting in the area. Villagers add that with the exception of 2009, such fires have occurred in the  same way and at roughly the same time every year for the last eight years.   They suggest that the military consciously uses forest fires as a tool of policy.   Such reports are frequently made of villages like Ikizce and Toptepe, which  were emptied when the war was at its height in the 1990s but have been  gradually repopulated in recent years. Whatever its causes, there's no doubt that the forest fire is pushing  impoverished locals into greater hardship. Most villages in Sirnak province depend heavily on animal husbandry for  income, and Ikizce and Toptepe are no different.  The forest fire has scorched  most of the grazing areas used by livestock breeders, causing serious  problems for the local economy. 'Nothing's left -- no trees, no shrubs,' Toptepe elder and shepherd Sivan  Aslan says.  'Everything's been burned, so we'll be forced to buy feed for our  animals. ' He adds that the villages have also lost scores of fruit trees to the  fire, which he estimates will end up costing every household in the area  between 1,000 and 1,500 euros this year. Local villagers additionally complain that the Turkish military arbitrarily  blocks shepherds' access to highland pastures on security grounds, further  compounding their difficulties.  Ikizce residents, for example, are forced to  bring their animals down from the pastures every day before evening prayers,  while inhabitants of Toptepe, who use much of the same land and live only a  few minutes away, are free to leave their animals out at night. 'There haven't been clashes around here for several years, but soldiers  prevent us from accessing our grazing lands,' Senlik says.  'Fighting was most  severe in the late 1980s, but even then we could graze our animals  comfortably. 'The punishing combination of annual fires and grazing prohibitions has  brought the livestock economy in Ikizce to the point of collapse.  Senlik says  that his village used to have at least 15,000 heads of livestock, whereas a  population of 400 people now subsists on 1,000 heads. 'We have no source of income aside from animal husbandry.  When we can't  rear our cattle, we remain hungry and can't send our children to school,'  Senlik tells IPS.  'We're thinking of leaving the village because we can't get by  like this.  When you add everything up, it seems like they're trying to displace  us. ' On Jul.  3, one day after the forest fire began, Sirnak municipality sent a  delegation of elected officials to inspect and try to subdue the fire.  Soldiers  reportedly launched missiles at an area 200 metres away from the delegation,  causing the fire to spread to areas it had not previously reached. 'When there's a fire in western Turkey, the government suppresses it with all  available means, including helicopters,' Sirnak mayor Ramazan Uysal, who  participated in the excursion and is a member of the leftist and pro-Kurdish  Peace and Democracy Party (BDP), tells IPS.  'When we try to suppress fires  here, they launch artillery at us. 'Leaders from Ikizce and Toptepe have explained their grievances to many  public authorities, including the military, provincial governorship, agricultural  and forestry ministries.  Despite this, the government has done nothing to  subdue the fire, and the inferno has become too large to be tamed without  the aid of helicopters, village chiefs say. 'The directorate of forestry affairs sent a few people, who came here, looked  around, and did nothing,' Guney explains.  'Why doesn't anyone help us? This  inaction shows that (Kurds) are not counted as equal citizens in this country. 'One Friday evening two weeks before the current fire in Cudi mountain began,  Taybet Inan went to water her wheat field near Sirnak town.  'Shortly  thereafter, a helicopter lowered over my head and launched two incendiary  projectiles into my field,' she tells IPS.  'My relatives and I put out the flames  quickly, but the losses amounted to about 250 euros. ' That is a significant  amount of money in a region where half the population lives beneath the  poverty line. 'There are no clashes around there.  I don't know why they did it.  Maybe for  fun,' she says.  Similar incidents occur in other parts of Kurdish southeastern Turkey.  An  investigation conducted by local human rights groups into forest fires that  occurred in three villages near Hasankeyf, a town which may be left  underwater if construction plans for a nearby dam are implemented,  concluded that the fires began in areas close to military bases, were not  caused by clashes, resulted in the destruction of thousands of fruit trees, and  that soldiers took no initiative to suppress them.   