Climate change is expected to disrupt agriculture in the U. S.   Midwest, with high carbon dioxide promoting crop growth but  stronger storms, drought, floods and migrating yields  dampening yields. Overall, there are signs that crops will be stressed, and  that weeds and insects will change their range.  The Midwest  climate has already become wetter and warmer, said Gene  Takle, an atmospheric scientist at Iowa State University.   That could mean a longer crop-growing season and savings on  air conditioning, but it doesn't necessarily guarantee  higher crop yields. Takle's model predicts that precipitation in the Midwest  will increase by 21 percent by the 2040s, with stream flows  climbing by 50 percent in the same period. His findings are similar to those of the Intergovernmental  Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) and the U. S.  Global Change  Research Programme.  Leaders in the breadbasket states have  debated how best to respond, from cutting back on coal power  to boosting wind energy, which has grown sharply in places  like Iowa. 'Climate change is happening at a much greater and  accelerated pace than we ever expected 30 years ago,' said  Richard Leopold, director of the Iowa Department of Natural  Resources. Huge floods in 2008, which left the state's second-biggest  city, Cedar Rapids, with massive downtown destruction,  intensified the debate, with a new set of recommendations  coming from a state panel by the end of the year. 'If we decide as a state to significantly reduce greenhouse  gas emissions in a hurry, we can actually do it,' said Sen.   Rob Hogg, a Democrat from Cedar Rapids.  'There are a lot of  things we can do for no cost, and others we can do for very  little cost. 'One of Takle's studies used Iowa's experience to show the  stress already showing up in the Midwest states, which are  major food exporters to other countries as well. For example, precipitation has risen gradually in Iowa over  the past century, but can vary widely from year to year.   Springs now are wetter, and autumns drier.  That can make  corn-planting difficult, but dry the grain more quickly in  the fall.  Records show a rise in absolute humidity, threatening crops  with a higher risk of disease and harmful fungi.  Changing weather patterns also are expected to alter  agriculture.  Summer storms already can be more intense, and  the Midwest has fought to avoid major flooding this year.   Models predict more-intense rains, worsening runoff and  related pollution and flooding. Also, warmer winters could mean a greater chance of rain  rather than snow.  That might help soil moisture. The records Takle analysed showed Iowa averages five more  frost-free days a year than in 1950.  But that doesn't mean  more time to grow crops, because of changes in temperature  and precipitation patterns. Generally, Iowa now has warmer winters, but fewer extremely  hot summer days.  Overall, the Midwest is expected to warm  through the middle of the century, but not as much as other  parts of the country. The IPCC reports strong research suggesting rising carbon  dioxide will make plants grow faster, but adds that the  long-term yields would depend on other factors.  'Results of  a large number of experiments designed to examine the  effects of elevated CO2 concentrations on crops have  generally confirmed high confidence in a net beneficial  effect of CO2 fertilisation, up to some level,' the panel  reports. 'Sustained plant response under field conditions to  concentrations beyond 2xCO2 would likely be dependent on  species as well as water and nutrient status and is highly  uncertain. 'The U. S.  Global Change Research Programme made a similar  prediction in report last September: 'Many crops show  positive responses to elevated carbon dioxide and low levels  of warming, but higher levels of warming often negatively  affect growth and yields. 'That organisation also reports other potential problems for  agriculture, including disruption of the livestock industry.   A key issue could be the severity of individual rains.  'Extreme events such as heavy downpours and droughts are  likely to reduce crop yields because excesses or deficits of  water have negative impacts on plant growth,' the research  programme reported.  Another key threat is likely to come from pest species, both  plants and insects, spreading into areas that don't  currently treat crops with chemicals aimed at those  particular invaders. 'Weeds, diseases and insect pests benefit from warming, and  weeds also benefit from a higher carbon dioxide  concentration, increasing stress on crop plants and  requiring more attention to pest and weed control,' the  programme's report read. That phenomenon already is showing up in fields, with  farmers in warmer areas spraying more than their  counterparts to the north.  For example, Florida sweet corn  growers spray pesticides 15 to 32 times a year, while New  York farmers spray five or fewer times, the research  programme reported. Scientists expect the warming to disrupt a hallmark farming  industry: livestock production.  'Increased heat, disease,  and weather extremes are likely to reduce livestock  productivity,' the research programme found. Part of that problem would come from heat-stressed pastures.   'Forage quality in pastures and rangelands generally  declines with increasing carbon-dioxide concentrations  because of the effects on plant nitrogen and protein  content, reducing the land's ability to supply adequate  livestock feed. 'Not only does warming open the possibility of new pests in a  given area - those that migrate northwardly, for example -  but also will change the distribution of fish and other  wildlife. The Marine Biological Laboratory based in Woods Hole,  Massachusetts, has already reported changes in water  circulation and fish species distribution in the Arctic zone  off Canada.  Takle said some wildlife biologists have watched  for similar behaviours in the Mississippi River. *This story is part of a series of features on biodiversity  by Inter Press Service (IPS), CGIAR/Biodiversity  International, International Federation of Environmental  Journalists (IFEJ), United Nations Environment  Programme/Convention on Biological Diversity - members of  the Alliance of Communicators for Sustainable Development  (COM+ - www. complusalliance. org). 