Genetically modified (GM) foods will be introduced more quickly in Europe as a  result of a new proposal, some Brussels officials fear. Over the past 12 years, the European Union has effectively observed a  moratorium on the cultivation of new GM crops because of widespread  opposition to biotechnology among both the public and some of the EU's  governments.  In a paper published Jul.  13, the Union's executive, the European Commission,  superficially recognised that governments have the right to keep the  territories they administer GM-free.  But privately officials say that the aim of  the initiative is to speed up the approval process for GM foods.  John Dalli, the EU's commissioner for food safety, said that the proposal  would not allow individual governments to ban GM foods on health or  environmental grounds as central EU bodies are tasked with assessing any  risk that such crops may pose.  But the governments would be allowed to cite  moral or ethical considerations when imposing unilateral bans. Lawyers advising the organisation Friends of the Earth have found that such  grounds would be legally intangible and could easily be challenged by  biotechnology companies in courts. Dalli would not be drawn on that legal opinion, other than to say that it  differed with counsel from the Commission's in-house lawyers.  'I will let the  lawyers fight it out,' he told IPS.  'I'm not a lawyer. 'Asked to provide examples of the ethical questions that might prompt  governments to ban GM foods, he said: 'It could be the fact that a country is  facing a massive aversion to a certain cultivation issue.  But I am not going to  prophesise what the reasons could be.  We would like to leave that to the  flexibilities we want to give (national governments). 'Green campaigners accused Dalli of playing deaf to calls to EU governments  for a strengthened authorisation procedure.  The campaigners argued that the  new proposal is at stark variance with a demand made unanimously by the  Union's environment ministers in 2008.  At that time, the ministers urged that  the European Food Safety Authority should assess the long-term impact of  GM foods on the many ecosystems found throughout the EU and that the  risks of GM crops should be studied by a body independent of the  biotechnology industry.  Greenpeace noted that José Manuel Barroso, the Commission's president, had  tried on four occasions to persuade EU governments to approve new GM  foods since his appointment in 2004.  'Now President Barroso is admitting  defeat by presenting a compromise deal,' said Greenpeace policy analyst  Stefanie Hundsdorfer.  'In an attempt to muddle through with his pro-GM agenda, he is offering  countries national bans if they turn a blind eye to the health and safety  concerns they have about new crops during the EU authorisation process.  But  individual bans cannot replace a scientifically sound EU-level safety  procedure. 'The new proposal follows an effort made by the Commission earlier this year  to revive the approval process.  In March the Commission chose a potato  known as Amflora as the first new GM crop to be cultivated in the EU in well  over a decade.  Despite that decision, three EU governments -- Hungary,  Austria and Luxembourg -- announced that they had forbidden the potato. Three other states -- France, Germany and Greece -- have joined Hungary,  Austria and Luxembourg in also prohibiting the cultivation of Mon-810, a  maize patented by the world's leading biotech firm Monsanto.  And Poland has  legislation on its statute books proscribing the sale of GM seeds.  In the short-term, the Commission is hoping that around 10 new GM crops  will be planted in Europe.  Four of them -- all varieties of maize -- have been  authorised by the EFSA, in some cases for more than five years.  Biotechnology firms claimed they were unhappy with the new proposal.  Carel  de Marchie Sarvaas, a representative of the trade association EuropaBio, said  the paper appeared to give governments 'carte blanche to ban safe and  approved GM crops in any country or region regardless of the needs or wishes  of their farmers. 'EuropaBio has, however, been having a series of meetings with the  Commission on how to end the logjam in the approvals process.  The  meetings, which also involve officials from EFSA in Parma, Italy, were initiated  after EuropaBio wrote to Barroso in 2006, warning that the antipathy of some  EU governments to GM foods could 'greatly diminish' the industry's chances  of proving its theory that such foods are socially beneficial.  Friends of the Earth appealed to EU governments to reject the new proposal.  It  says that the proposal will not prevent organic and other non-GM crops from  being 'contaminated'.  Traces of GM crops can easily be carried by the wind  into fields that had until then been GM-free, according to environmentalists. 'While the European Commission is seemingly offering countries the right to  implement national bans, in reality the proposal aims to do the opposite:  opening Europe's fields to GM crops,' said Mute Schimpf from Friends of the  Earth.  'The Commission continues to fail to protect Europe's food and feed  from contamination by GM crops. ' 