Despite the creation of a High-Level Advisory Group on Climate  Change Financing (AGF), a group of hard-hit Pacific islands is  expressing doubt that aid will be delivered in a timely  manner. 'The Pacific SIDS (Small Island Developing States) bear  almost no responsibility for the onset of climate change,  yet we are suffering the consequences today…Climate change  is a man-made disaster and redress for the damage being done  to our islands is long overdue,' said Ambassador Marlene  Moses of Nauru. The advisory group has been tasked with the responsibility  of designing innovative ways to mobilise new and additional  financial resources from private and public sources to bring  into force commitments made at the climate conference in  Copenhagen last year. World leaders pledged 100 billion dollars per year by 2020,  in addition to 30 billion dollars up to 2012.  The funds,  which have yet to be raised, will be delivered to developing  countries for mitigating and adapting to the impacts of  climate change. Known as one of the world's most vulnerable regions to  climate change, the Pacific SIDS face threats to food  security, water security and territorial integrity. Prime Minister Jens Stoltenberg of Norway, co-chair of the  AGF, expressed optimism at a briefing Tuesday that there  were enough potential sources waiting to be tapped into.   'It's possible to say today that the discussion, the  deliberations has shown that there are many, different  possible sources of finance…The problem is whether they are  politically viable,' he said. His co-chair, Ethiopian Prime Minister Meles Zenawi,  explained to reporters that incentives for the private  sector to invest in green technologies would be one of the  mechanisms used to build binding commitments from these  sources.  The group will also be taking cues from the  practices employed by multilateral development banks, he  added. The Pacific SIDS, which includes countries such as Nauru,  Palau, Samoa, and Tonga, claim that due to the bureaucratic  red tape and without direct access to the AGF, their region  might not receive proportionate funding. They also charge that the funding promised alone would not  be enough to contain and reduce the effects, citing the  World Bank's report that it would cost 75 to 100 billion  dollars per year for the period 2010 to 2050 for initiatives  directed at adaptation. Ambassador Stuart Beck of Palau told IPS that it was  unlikely the private sector would be responsive and that the  funds would be received in a timely manner.  'We're not  really sanguine about the delivery here.  They're nice words,  but when you get on the ground it's difficult to build  business models that make a whole lot of sense,' he said. U. N.  Secretary-General Ban Ki-Moon emphasised that a top  priority of the group would be to enhance confidence and  trust between the developed and developing countries in the  delivery of aid.  'Climate change is not going away.  The  risks — and costs — of inaction grow each year.  The more we  delay, the more we will have to pay, in lost opportunities,  resources and lives,' he said. While a majority of the urban population of the Pacific SIDS  is dependent on foreign imports for their daily supply of  food, staples such as yams, taro, sweet potatoes and bananas  are still cultivated locally.  Aside from the threat of  rising sea levels, climate change is projected to have a  devastating impact on the production of these crops, due to  prolonged variations in the arrival of rainfall. Central to the livelihood of Fiji's population are its coral  reefs, marine systems and fisheries, which provide income,  employment and foreign exchange. Initiatives have been launched to prevent and adapt to the  changing landscape.  But without sustained financing from  external sources, these states would not be able to  effectively address the threat of food security, said  Ambassador Moses, the Permanent Representative of Nauru to  the U. N. The AGF, formed in February this year, will submit its final  recommendations to the secretary-general in October, a few  weeks before the next U. N.  climate summit in November to be  held in Cancun, Mexico. It has also come under fire for its gender breakdown — 19 of  the 20 members are male. 