The World Bank's Board of Directors said studies for a  potential mining project in Indonesia could move forward  Tuesday but civil society groups, citing studies that have  already been done, condemned the decision. The approval, they say, speaks to deeper problems with the  standards against which the Bank evaluates extractive  projects and its policy towards supporting new mining  operations generally. Japan's Mitsubishi Corporation and France's Eramet, backers  of the mine project, had asked the Multilateral Investment  Guarantee Agency (MIGA) for a guarantee of 207 million  dollars against the risks of expropriation, breach of  contract and civil disturbance while they conduct  exploration and feasibility studies for the Weda Bay Nickel  mine on Indonesia's Halmahera Island. NGOs had said that support for the guarantee would amount to  support for a project that would displace indigenous  peoples, destroy vast areas tropical forest and threaten  rivers and the ocean with sediment and toxic chemicals. Tuesday, the Board of Directors signed off on guaranteeing  the corporations' investments in the studies.  Only the U. S.   delegate to the board abstained from the vote.  Though MIGA  notes the contract has not yet been signed, it says it plans  to support the guarantee now that the board has given its  approval. The NGOs are looking ahead.  Signing the contract is now  'just a procedural question', said Scott Cardiff of  Earthworks, a Washington-based organisation that targets  destructive mineral development practices.  But the Bank sees a more complicated picture going forward.   Approving the guarantee would allow it to be a part of the  study process and thus more able to influence the way in  which this and other mining operations are designed. 'MIGA sees this project as an opportunity to influence the  way such complex projects are done - with the best  environmental and social safeguards in place and company  compliance,' MIGA Executive Vice President Izumi Kobayashi  said in a statement.  'This stage is precisely to assess what  the potential environmental and social impacts might be and  to identify appropriate mitigants to address them. 'Earthworks and the Bank Information Center feel they already  have a good sense of what those impacts might be.  They  requested a review of the Weda Bay Nickel project by Robert  Moran, an independent water quality, geochemical and  hydrogeological scientist. His review, released Monday, examined the publicly available  information regarding the project's plans and found that  MIGA's endorsement is based on optimism and predictions,  which themselves are based on inadequate data.  Moran also  highlighted the potential for water pollution risks as  torrential rains or earthquakes could allow mine waste to  contaminate drinking water.  He was also critical of the plan to dump the mine's liquid  processing waste into shallow ocean waters, which would  'cause significant negative impacts to the marine life and  collective ecosystem in Weda Bay over the 30 to 50 year life  of the operation. 'The Bank addressed this dumping fear as well as other fears  raised by Indonesian groups in a Jun.  16 letter.  'No  tailings [sic] dumped into Weda Bay or any other body of  water,' wrote the director of MIGA's economics and policy  group, Frank J.  Lysy.  'All residues will be dried and then  stored on land, to be progressively covered and  revegetated. 'Lysy goes on to note that while a project of Weda Bay's size  may have negative potential impacts, it may also be  beneficial.  Referring to discussions with local villagers,  he says the local population is 'highly supportive of the  project, as they look forward to the availability of well- paying jobs and other economic opportunities. 'In its statement Tuesday, MIGA noted the potential impacts  of the project could include 'biodiversity loss, pollution,  erosion, population influx, and potential impacts on  indigenous groups and cultural heritage. 'Lysy notes that 'no decision is being sought at this time on  the construction and operation of the mine itself' since  both the local population and the bank and investors  recognise the need to assess the potential for these  impacts. In an email, MIGA spokesperson Mallory Saleson also  underlined the point — in boldface and caps — that the  proposed project consists of 'an exploration and feasibility  study ONLY at this stage'. But Cardiff says the studies 'generally lead to some form of  mining'. Moreover, in a study he did of the biodiversity impacts of  the Weda Bay project, Cardiff says that impacts from forest  clearing 'will occur during the exploration phase, not just  during construction and operation'. This and other impacts, he says, will lead to long-term  habitat loss for a number of species, some of which are  listed as endangered or vulnerable. Deeper problems with miningThe Jun.  16 letter not only challenges NGOs' accusations of  dumping in ocean water but says the Weda Bay project would  supply its own major energy needs from the excess heat it  generates and 'not be a large net user of energy'.  It would  also aim to revegetate the same amount of land it mines each  year. But the NGOs contend that the problems go far deeper than  this one mine. 'The World Bank has supported destructive mining projects  all over the world; it is time for that to change,' says  Cardiff. He cites the Bank's International Finance Corporation's  financing of Ghana's Ahafo mine, Peru's Yanacocha mine and  the Marlin mine in Guatemala which was recently ordered to  suspend its operations due to pressure by the U. N.  Special  Rapporteur on Indigenous Rights, the Inter-American  Commission on Human Rights and other groups. Earthworks also accuses MIGA of not abiding by its own  Performance Standards, specifically standards number one -  on social and environmental assessments — and number six —  on conserving biodiversity and ensuring sustainable resource  management. 'The Bank is not only not following its own procedures,  apparently, but those policies are inadequate.  The  Performance Standards do not represent responsible mining  and are in need of reform,' Cardiff said.  He notes, however,  that the IFC's standards are currently under review and that  he hopes stronger ones will emerge. Once the Weda Bay Nickel studies are complete, the companies  will decide whether to invest and continue to develop the  mine and build a processing plant.  This final investment  decision should be made before the end of 2012, according to  MIGA. 