A comprehensive report, released Thursday by Chatham House,  finds that production of illegal timber worldwide has declined  by 22 percent since 2002, a trend that is benefiting both  communities dependent on tropical forests and the global  climate. Sam Lawson, lead author of the report, 'Illegal Logging and  Related Trade: Indicators of the Global Response', told IPS  that combating illegal logging is of paramount importance. 'Illegal logging is one of the prime drivers of  deforestation worldwide,' he said, 'and deforestation in  turn is contributing to climate change and the destruction  of livelihoods and the environment of the species that  inhabit the forest. 'The report focuses on the industry as a whole, from  production to processing to consumption, by examining  countries involved in each step of the supply chain.  Forests  in the 'producer' countries are harvested for timber  (Brazil, Indonesia, Cameroon, Malaysia, and Ghana), which is  processed (China and Vietnam), and sold in 'consumer'  countries (the United States, Britain, Japan, France, and  the Netherlands).  According to the report, illegal logging has declined by 50  percent in Cameroon, between 50 and 75 percent in the  Brazilian Amazon, and by 75 percent in Indonesia in the last  decade.  By reducing illegal logging in these three nations,  the report estimates that up to 17 million hectares of  forest have been saved from degradation - more land than  England and Wales combined. By minimising illegal logging in tropical forests in  Cameroon, Brazil, and Indonesia, the report states, the  release of up to 14. 6 billion tonnes of carbon dioxide may  be prevented—a number equivalent to half of the total amount  of carbon dioxide released by human actions each year.  Reducing the amount of carbon dioxide is crucial to efforts  to combat global warming.  'If we can reduce the amount of  CO2 being released into the environment as a result of  deforestation, we make it less likely that the planet will  warm in a detrimental way,' Lawson told IPS.  'It's about  mitigating and trying to reduce the effect of climate  change. 'In addition to global environmental benefits, the reduction  of illegal logging activities directly benefits communities  that depend on tropical forests for their livelihoods.  The  Chatham report found that if timber was harvested legally in  the three countries under governmental regulations, an  estimated 6. 5 billion dollars could be raised.  The report  notes that this number is more than twice the amount spent  each year in overseas aid for primary school education.  Although the report's findings are positive, illegal logging  remains a significant issue across the globe.  The report  points to the fact that as patent instances of illegal  logging are identified and disbanded, other practices that  are less visible are becoming a larger problem, such as  legal companies logging outside permitted areas and the  illegal issuance of permits to clear forests for  agricultural plantations.  As of last year, the illegal logging industry has  contributed to the degradation of up to five million  hectares of forest around the world and the yearly release  of up to three billion tonnes of carbon dioxide. The problem of illegal harvesting of timber is only one  element in the production process; illegal consumption is  equally crucial to address.  In 2008, the report found,  companies in the five 'consumer' countries purchased a total  of 17 million cubic meters of illegal timber and wood  products, worth approximately 8. 4 billion dollars.  Most of  the timber was in the form of processed products like  plywood and furniture.  Currently, a variety of laws and regulations designed to  combat the issue of illegal logging are being implemented in  the EU and the US.  In the EU, as a result of Voluntary  Partnership Agreements, progress in the regulation and  policing of the timber industry is gaining momentum.  In the U. S. , a piece of legislation called the Lacey Act has  been amended to make the handling of illegally harvested  timber an illegal act.  Last week, on Jul.  7, the EU  parliament approved similar legislation that will take  effect in 2012. The next step, the report states, is for other countries  heavily involved in the production and consumption of timber  to approve similar measures.  A main focus is on China, the  top importer and exporter of illegal timber—the country  currently imports about 20 million cubic meters of illegal  wood annually, more than all five 'consumer' countries  combined.  'The most important next step is for Japan and China to  implement the kind of legislation that the US has and the EU  is in the process of implementing,' Lawson told IPS.  'If  they did so, that would mean all the biggest markets in the  world have been shut to illegal timber. ''The systems and regulation of environmental controls in  place are meaningless if most of the logging takes place  illegally,' he said.  'Enforcement is the critical factor. '