Heavy reliance on petroleum imports, the need for electricity in rural areas, and  the ongoing effort towards sustainable development have focussed Central  America's attention on renewable energy.  But that doesn't mean there isn't  opposition. This year, Honduras plans to have one of the largest wind energy farms in  Latin America up and running, with an output of 100 megawatts of electricity. Located in the municipality of Santa Ana, 24 kilometres from the Honduran  capital, it cost 250 million dollars, according to owner Energía Eólica  Honduras (Wind Energy Honduras), subsidiary of Mesoamerica Energy, made  up of 15 business groups from the region. In addition, Honduras will invest 2. 1 billion dollars in 52 hydroelectric  projects between 2010 and 2016, each with the capacity to generate five  megawatts, announced the Honduran Association of Small Producers of  Renewable Energy in early June. 'We based our efforts on three aspects: energy security by avoiding  dependence on international petroleum prices, improving access to energy in  rural zones, and sustainable development,' Association president Elsia Paz  told IPS. According to Paz, promotion of renewable energy has been important for  achieving a balanced diversification of the Honduran energy matrix, as 70  percent comes from fossil fuels, 'a resource that is imported and leads to  capital flight. 'Honduras is typical of Central America's high reliance on oil for generating  electricity. In the 1980s, about 75 percent of the region's electricity came from  renewable sources -- primarily hydroelectric dams.  That portion has now  dropped to 50 percent, according to the non-governmental Energy Network  Foundation BUN-CA, based in Costa Rica.  The rest comes from hydrocarbon- based sources. Nicaragua, meanwhile, through its Ministry of Energy and Mines, announced  in May that all of the energy generated in 2016 would come from renewable  sources through the implementation of the National Programme for  Sustainable Electrification and Renewable Energies. Similar to Honduras, 70 percent of Nicaragua's electricity is generated from  fossil fuels, and 30 percent from renewable resources, according to official  figures. To improve that ratio, construction is under way of the Tumarín hydroelectric  dam, the largest in the country, in the South Atlantic Autonomous Region.   Behind the project, which will produce 220 megawatts, is the Brazilian  consortium Quieroz Galvão-Electrobras. But Tumarín has come under fire from the surrounding communities, which  say they were not consulted about the project and it will have negative  consequences for the entire Río Grande de Matagalpa watershed.  The dam,  which requires an investment of more than 600 million dollars, will change  hands to be administered by the Nicaraguan government in 30 years.  Meanwhile, the Amayo I and II wind park, with U. S. , Guatemalan and  Nicaraguan capital, is so far the largest operating in Central America. Located along the shore of Lake Nicaragua, in the southern province of Rivas,  it generates 63 megawatts of electricity. Luis Molina, of the environmental control unit of Nicaragua's Ministry of  Energy and Mines, told IPS that his country aims to implement renewable  energy projects in order to reduce emissions of greenhouse-effect gases,  which cause global warming, and to decrease the portion of the national  budget going to the purchase of fossil fuels. He said that at the 'macro' level, the main objective is to achieve 100 percent  energy from renewable sources, while at the 'micro' level the goal is to  extend the electrical network in rural areas. About 10 million people in Central America, of a total population of 40  million in the region, do not have electricity in their homes. In El Salvador, which is already producing biofuels and has tapped into solar  and geothermal energy, the Japan International Cooperation Agency will  finance 1. 5 million dollars for drafting a master plan for developing  renewable energies, to begin at year's end. Approximately 60 percent of the region's energy potential lies in possible  hydroelectric dams.  Of the 22,000 megawatts of potentially exploitable hydro-energy, the Central  American isthmus has developed just 17 percent, according to the Central  American Electrification Council. Costa Rica is the region's leading producer of clean energy, with 80 percent  coming from hydroelectric sources, according to the governmental Costa  Rican Institute of Electricity (ICE). President Laura Chinchilla announced that she wants to make Costa Rica the  first country in the world to run 100 percent on renewable energy. But it is no easy task.  Guatemala's renewable energy coordinator at its  Ministry of Energy, Otto Ruiz Balcárcel, told IPS that there is a great deal of  misinformation about renewable energy, which limits investment in the  sector. 'There are towns that think water gets contaminated from the hydroelectric  turbines, and investors have not been able to communicate how it works,' he  cited as one example. However, he believes Guatemala is on the road to expanding clean energy,  primarily through more hydroelectric dams. Of a different opinion is Oscar Conde, activist with the group Madreselva de  Guatemala, who told IPS that renewable energy projects like hydroelectric  dams alter ecosystems and affect rural communities, who are not taken into  account when the dams are built. 'They are transnational or national businesses that use the water for their  own benefit, and the communities just watch it go by,' he said.   