The environment remains a second-tier matter in Latin America and the  Caribbean despite being interwoven with persistent poverty and stalled  economic development in the region, according to a new report from the United  Nations Environment Programme. Dozens of experts from the region were convened by UNEP to contribute to  the report 'Environment Outlook for Latin America and the Caribbean' (GEO- LAC3), following in the steps of reports presented in 2000 and 2003. 'Our intention is to provide ideas for human development with support for  eradicating poverty, not to formulate an environmental policy, but rather to  incorporate the environmental dimension in public policies,' Mara Murillo, of  Mexico, UNEP regional deputy director, told IPS from Panama. The environment 'is taken as a given; it remains on the fringes of national  accounts, and an effort at internalising it is required not only for valuing our  ecosystems but for providing clean air, water and food for communities that  are working to escape poverty,' said Murillo, who presented the GEO-LAC3  report Wednesday. According to Venezuelan expert Antonio De Lisio, the environment 'is still  seen in this region with traditional criteria, based merely on conservation. 'The environment 'isn't generally linked with policies for overcoming poverty,  which is the big issue in Latin America and the Caribbean,' De Lisio, director  of the environmental studies centre at the Central University of Venezuela,  told IPS. The GEO-LAC3, in considering the region's modes of development, notes  that the biggest challenge is poverty, given that 35 percent of the population  (189 million people) is poor, and 14 percent are extremely poor.  Historically, the region's development model 'has been largely based upon on  the provision of food, raw materials and natural resources,' states the report,  a model that 'leads simultaneously to economic growth, social disintegration  and environmental degradation, with a marked trend towards more income  concentration and a less equitable share of the fruits of growth. 'In that context, the continued lax environmental regulation in exploiting  natural resources in many countries is unable to deal with the emerging  environmental tensions in the region, according to the report. In De Lisio's opinion, 'the countries have done more to advertise their  resources than to work towards a sustainable development model of their  own that allows them to overcome poverty. ''The result was a focus for a long time on the vocation for exporting  petroleum from Venezuela, copper from Chile, or agricultural commodities  from Paraguay,' he said. The UNEP report backs that claim in that the region's insertion into the  international market has been through 'exporting natural resources and  goods with little or no processing. . .  Primary goods account for 73 percent of  exports. 'As it followed this path -- often ignoring environmental variables -- the  region saw its population grow 51 percent in 40 years, especially in urban  areas, where expansion was largely unplanned and unregulated.  This also  contributed to a 76-percent jump in water demand in just 15 years, and a  four-fold increase in electricity demand in the last 35 years. 'Accelerated urbanisation without planning sets out one of the region's  urgent tasks, likewise the loss of forest -- although the deforestation rate  has begun to slow -- and vulnerability to climate change,' said Murillo. GEO-LAC3 notes that six of the world's most megadiverse countries are  found in Latin America and the Caribbean, but 'this impressive biodiversity is  being extinguished by increasing deforestation and the destruction of  habitats, in which many species are endangered to one degree or another. 'The scientists contributing to the report warn about crossing the 'point of no  return' in consuming the planet's resources, stressing that it is 'crucial that  all sectors of society understand the importance of this limit so as to decide  when to backtrack in order to operate within safe limits. 'In laying out the possible scenarios, the GEO-LAC3 calls on decision-makers  to 'systematise how an integrated approach is applied to better respond to  socioeconomic and environmental problems on regional and national  sustainable development agendas. ' The experts involved in this research underscore, for example, that  investment in environmental and social sustainability should be interpreted  as essential for economic development. However, they warn that some of the actions taken towards achieving the  Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) established by the United Nations, as  well as other environmental goals, 'can be counterproductive. 'Ensuring environmental sustainability is the seventh of the eight MDGs, which  the UN General Assembly established in 2000, with the target date of 2015,  and 1990 as the baseline.  One of the aims is to incorporate the principles of  sustainable development into national policies and programmes. One example that the GEO-LAC3 cites as counterproductive is 'the increased  large-scale production of biofuels, mainly for trade,' which competes for  land and water resources, and therefore with food security and biodiversity  protection. The proposal to redirect the models for growth 'should have in parallel the  goals of fighting poverty and creating sustainable employment, utilising the  local workforce, local innovation and efficient energy use, so that  employment boosts our competence as a people and our capacity for  conservation,' said De Lisio. UNEP official Murillo, meanwhile, stressed that the new report can be put to  practical use.  'We hope that people utilise it, those who formulate policies,  decision-makers, academics, non-governmental organisations and the  common citizen, they can all do a lot with its standards for water  consumption or efficient energy use,' she said.  