Canadian company Gabriel Resources has managed to resurrect a cyanide-based  gold exploitation project which had been declared illegal in courts, and is  opposed by most Romanians. The gold exploitation planned by the Canadian company in Rosia Montana  (Alba county, northwest Romania) is set to be the largest in Europe.  Three  hundred tons of gold and 1,400 tons of silver are to be extracted over 16  years from four quarries in Apuseni Mountains.  Toronto-registered Gabriel Resources owns 80 percent of the stakes in Rosia  Montana Gold Corporation (RMGC, the entity set up to build and run the  operation), while Romanian state-owned Minvest Deva has most of the  remaining shares. With the price of gold more than doubling since the project was planned,  profits from the exploitation are set to be huge.  Over the past couple of years,  RMGC has been claiming that the Romanian state alone would gain between 2  and 4 billion dollars from this project.  The project has been opposed since 2002 by locals and activists across the  country.  The Save Rosia Montana campaign has grown into the strongest civic  movement in contemporary Romania.  The project would involve the resettlement of all villagers from Rosia Montana  (situated between the quarries) and relocating churches and cemeteries.  Even  though RMGC has bought close to 80 percent of the property in Rosia  Montana village, the remaining villagers are determined not to sell their lands. The gravest concern is over the extraction technology: gold is to be separated  using sodium cyanide, a highly toxic substance.  According to the group  Romania Without Cyanides, over 10 million kilograms of sodium cyanide are  to be used yearly.  A study of the Romanian Academy (the largest academic  body in the country made up of scientists from all fields) shows that further  dangers exist: heavy metals resulted and sulfur dioxide used in the process  could severely pollute the surrounding lands and waters.  The Academy advises against the RMGC project, quoting previous disastrous  cyanide spills at other exploitations, one of which took place in 2000 in  Romanian county Baia Mare.  According to RMGC, however, 'the project will stop pollution and protect the  environment. ' The company claims it will clear the existing pollution (there  has been mining in the area since Roman times) and clean up everything once  they finish extraction: the company website shows pictures of green pastures  with animals grazing, indicating these would replace the exploitation 25 years  after the start of the project.  The company also says the project would create over 3,000 jobs in an area  with high unemployment rates.  But these claims have not persuaded opponents of the project.  According to a  poll conducted in 2007 by the Romanian Chamber of Deputies, 95 percent of  respondents said they did not want the gold mine to open.  Figures provided  by environmental group Greenpeace indicate 80 percent of Romanians oppose  the project.  Villagers remaining in Rosia Montana are arguing that the area could be  developed for tourism as it hosts valuable archeological sites dating back to  Roman times and is surrounded by beautiful forests.  They argue employment  generated by the RMGC project would be temporary while the environmental  damage and displacement of people, permanent.  A year back, the opposition seemed to have won.  The project was blocked by  court decisions suspending the urban plans submitted by RMGC.  The Ministry  of Environment also suspended the procedure of granting authorisation for  construction.  In May this year, a resolution voted by the European Parliament gave further  hope to Romanian activists: the European Parliament asked for the complete  banning of cyanide-based mining across the continent.  The parliament  pointed out that cyanide is a highly toxic chemical qualifying as a main  pollutant under the EU Water Framework Directive and that 'cyanide mining  provides few jobs, and only for a period of eight-16 years, while it runs the  risk of causing enormous cross-border damage, the cost of which is usually  not met by the responsible operating companies. ' RMGC has already invested 300 million dollars in Romania, according to its  executive director, Dragos Tanase.  It appealed all court decisions against it  and submitted three new versions of the urban plan. The company's increased confidence was obvious during a conference it  organised in early July in Bucharest.  There, private experts hired by RMGC  explained that the project could bring Romania 19 billion dollars in direct and  indirect revenues -- four times the amount previously announced by the  company.  While opponents of the project held hope for the EU ban, the European  Commission has refused to endorse the European Parliament resolution, with  Environment Commissioner Janez Potocnik saying Jun.  23 that a total ban  would be 'detrimental to employment without additional environmental and  health added value. ''While the resolution of the European Parliament is an important political  decision, the reaction of the Commission is decisive,' Franziska Keller, a  Green MEP from Germany told IPS.  'Mr.  Potocnik's reaction is short-sighted  and not in line with his commitment to resource efficiency.  He has opted for  the destructive path of primary mining of gold instead of leading the way to a  far more environmentally friendly -- and most likely more job intensive --  recycling society. ' 