The Nigerian government is trying to cope with an outbreak of lead poisoning  which has killed over 200 people in Zamfara State since early July. According to NGO News Africa, medical personnel supervising the treatment  of victims confirmed that most of those who died were children aged five  years and younger. Doctor Alhassan Hamisu Dama, told Good Health Weekly, 'I cannot say  precisely, but more than 200 children died and that is why we are  concentrating on treating victims of that age group. 'He also urged for financial and technical assistance.  'The World Health  Organisation (WHO) is working with its U. N.  partners to mobilise funds to deal  with this unprecedented environmental emergency,' Dama said. However, WHO had no response for IPS as to when these funds were going to  be mobilised or where they were explicitly coming from. Dama told IPS, that the treatment for the children is fund demanding.  He said  'to place just one child on the complete dose of drug treatment requires  about N480,000 [3,190 U. S.  dollars]. 'U.  Joy Ogwu, the Permanent Representative of Nigeria, refused to comment to  IPS about the outbreak and its affect on the country’s citizens and  environment. However, an on-site medic told NGO News Africa, ' all the victims had more  than 65,000 microgrammes per decilitre lead blood levels….  The implication  of this is that many of them might have suffered permanent brain damage and  the damage is likely to affect their intelligence.  They might show other  manifestations of damage to the central nervous system. 'Additionally, the Global Disease Detection (GDD) Operations Centre of the  U. S.  Centre for Disease Control (US CDC) is supporting the analysis of  approximately 50 different types of environmental samples, including water,  dust and soil. Beginning in early June, MSF received permission from the Nigerian Food and  Drug Association (FDA) to move forward with chelation therapy treatments for  acute lead toxicity. However, the number of child deaths continues to rise, according to the US  CDC. Jay Dempsey of the US CDC told IPS, 'Control measures have included  initiating chelation therapy when appropriate, identifying and remediating  contaminated areas, developing public health messages, and controlling  mining activities’’. ‘’As of 13 July, MSF had provided oral chelation therapy to 166 children in a  local hospital.  Most children have responded well, with convulsions resolving  within one day of initiating treatment. 'The Dutch arm of Doctors Without Borders has also treated contaminated  villagers with drugs they have brought in, according the New York Times. Médecins Sans Frontières (MSF) reported to the Zamfara State Ministry of  Health that there was an increasing incidence of childhood illness and  mortality in the two Local Government Areas (LGAs) of Bukkuyum and Anka in  March-April. A response team deployed by the US CDC, including members from  TerraGraphics Environmental Engineering Inc.  sent by Blacksmith Institute, the  national and state authorities, MSF, and the country office of WHO,  investigated the matter and confirmed that there was 'severe lead poisoning  in children in the villages of Dareta and Yargalma. 'The activity of illegal miners and the improper processing of lead- contaminated gold ore caused the high death tolls. However, the lead-poisoning outbreak has proven to be significantly more  severe. To date, the US CDC reports that there have been documented lead- poisoning related deaths in at least six villages in Zamfara since the outbreak  in March-April. Within recent months, medical and environmental measures to eradicate the  poisoning have been taking place in Nigeria. The Nigerian Ministry of Environment is working to develop public health  interventions, and plans to hire 70 workers per village for remediation, which  might include installing cement floors to seal out any remaining  contamination. Investigations confirm that the environmental contamination and timing of  the outbreak are related to the recent increase in illegal mining activities and  the greater involvement of women and children in processing lead  contaminated gold ore in their homes, there still is no plan for the residents  to evacuate the area, according to BBC News. According to NGO News Africa, 'high cost of treatment coupled with shortage  of hospital staff, reluctance by parents in the affected communities to  surrender their children for treatment and inaccessibility of some affected  villages continue to be major factors militating against the response drive  spearheaded by the Zamfara State government. '