Fears of a trade dispute with Canada have made European Union officials  reluctant to categorise tar sands from North America as a more polluting fuel  than conventional petrol. Officials working for the EU's executive, the European Commission, are  considering the implementation of a fuel quality law nominally designed to  make transport cleaner.  While the overall goal of the directive has been agreed -- that oil companies  bring down their emissions of climate changing greenhouse gases by 6  percent between this year and 2020 -- its fine print has yet to be hammered  out.  One of the trickiest issues to emerge in the discussions relates to  whether imports of non-conventional sources of oil should be restricted.  In a 2009 paper drafted by environment officials tar sands were deemed to be  20 percent more damaging to the climate than the petrol typically used to  power Europe's cars.  But this provision was removed from the draft after Ross  Hornby, Canada's ambassador in Brussels, wrote to Karl Falkenberg, head of  the Commission's environment department, in January. Hornby's letter was made available to green campaigners, under the EU's  freedom of information rules.  In it, he objected to a proposal that fuels  derived from tar sands would be treated differently to those using  conventional crude oil.  The reporting requirements that this would place on  energy firms would be too onerous and would constitute a 'barrier' to trade,  he warned.  Tar sands -- a mixture of bitumen, water, sand and clay -- lying under the  Canadian province of Alberta constitute the world's second largest proven  reserves of oil, outside Saudi Arabia.  A study titled Energy Revolution  published earlier this month by Greenpeace and the European Renewable  Energy Council estimated that producing oil from tar sands would release  more than four times more carbon dioxide into the atmosphere than standard  oil drilling does today.  A senior Brussels official, speaking on condition of anonymity, said that the  question of how tar sands should be categorised in the EU 'goes further than  the quality of oil, it is also a trade question. ' The official added that 'you can  be sure' the matter will be discussed in the context of a nominally separate  free trade agreement that the EU and Canada have aimed to conclude by the  end of next year.  Stuart Trew from the Council of Canadians, a social justice organisation, said  a moratorium on the extraction of tar sands is necessary.  The eagerness of  the Ottawa government to exploit the reserves under Alberta is 'a blight on  Canada's reputation and on the world,' he told IPS. Trew expressed particular concern about how a draft version of the trade  agreement would -- if implemented in its current form -- allow corporations  to take action against measures that they perceive as hostile to trade.  A  similar provision in the North America Free Trade Agreement has enabled  companies to attack health and environmental measures in the U. S.  and  Mexico, he added, noting that the procedure lets corporations bypass courts  and instead set up private panels.  'Any attempt to cut back on the production of tar sands, to make stronger  environmental rules or to limit the amount of water used to make tar sands  could result in a challenge,' he said.  Three to five barrels of water are  required for every barrel of oil produced from tar sands.  Connie Hedegaard, the EU's commissioner for climate action, wrote to several  green groups Jul.  13 promising that a proposal for regulating tar sands would  be put forward after her summer break (most Brussels institutions close  during August).  A spokeswoman for Hedegaard said that the Commission is 'carefully  analysing the different options available and will come up with a balanced  proposal, including solid reporting requirements necessary for demonstrating  compliance with the target. 'Shell, one of the largest investors in the Alberta tar sands industry, has been  vigorously lobbying against tough EU fuel quality rules.  In May, it hosted a  dinner for members of the European Parliament in an attempt to convince  them that tar sands extraction should not be vilified.  Ecologists are adamant that a specific 'default value' should be set for tar  sands, stating that their production must respect EU moves to reduce the  environmental impact of transport fuel.  Without such a value, tar sands would  be treated the same as conventional petrol.  Nusa Urbancic from the organisation Transport and the Environment said that  numerous scientific studies have indicated that tar sands must be regarded as  dirtier than conventional fossil fuels.  The results of the EU's discussions will  have implications that stretch beyond the Union's borders, she added.  'The European Commission has a duty to protect the environment, not to  protect Canada's (commercial) interests,' she said.  'Europe is a standard- setter when it comes to fuels, vehicles, electronic machinery and things like  that.  The Canadians fear that if the Europe puts in a value for tar sands, other  countries will follow.  This is clearly a political decision.  If we want to prevent  climate change, we should be leaving this stuff underground. '  