The spirit of international negotiations in Montreal on a draft protocol on Access  and Benefit Sharing (ABS) of natural resources were marred by Canada’s  insistence on a decentralised approach to ABS, Peigi Wilson, a Métis lawyer  present at the meeting in support of the Quebec Native Women, told IPS. 'I got the distinct sense that Canada was throwing objections to slow the  negotiations,' Wilson, a former U. N.  Environment Programme (UNEP) official,  added. The Working Group on ABS met last week to finalise negotiations in time for  an October summit in Nagoya, Japan, where a protocol on biodiversity will be  open for signature.  The meeting concluded with negotiations suspended until  mid-September. As one of the objectives of the Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD), ABS  works to ensure that the benefits derived from genetic resources are  distributed in a proportionate manner to reflect the contribution and rights of  indigenous people and local communities. Canada is pushing for any ABS protocol to be based on contractual mutually  agreed terms (MAT) - individual agreements reached between users and  providers of a genetic resource on how benefits should be shared.  Canada is  avoiding instituting national ABS requirements, instead opting to allow  different jurisdictions and companies to develop their own frameworks. According to Environment Canada’s official website, the federal government  does not want to impose a uniform national model - it wants to allow for  flexibility and adaptation in each context.  It also notes that while laws have  not yet been developed on ABS, there are legal measures in place dealing with  the collection of biological resources in the country’s national parks. In Montreal, an alliance of indigenous groups from across the world appealed  for an amendment to the draft protocol.  They argued that the draft  undermined their right to self-determination and failed to reflect and invoke  the U. N.  Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples. At odds with Canada and other developed countries, the regional  representative of Africa supported the indigenous peoples’ challenge of MAT  on a contractual basis. Industrialised countries, including Canada have been criticised by developing  countries and local communities for catering to the needs of private  companies, which leads to the misappropriation of the earth’s resources and  traditional knowledge.  This misappropriation could involve the unlicensed and  uncompensated collection of indigenous plants, animals, microorganisms,  genes or traditional knowledge for patenting by corporations and researchers. Groups such as Québec Native Women, Indigenous Law Institute, and  Indigenous World Association are seeking to change the nature of the  negotiation process, which requires a consensus among the states. Wilson told IPS that negotiations kicked off on an uneven playing field for  indigenous groups - the chair prevented indigenous representatives from  actively participating in dialogue with the delegations. It was recommended that the consensus be extended to include the  indigenous groups to correct any power imbalance.  The recommendation also  included the need for financial assistance and other resources, to facilitate  indigenous participation. The U. N.  has dubbed 2010 as the year of biodiversity.  In observation of this  thematic issue, the CBD has initiated a 2010 Biodiversity Target, imploring  countries to substantially reduce the current rate of biodiversity loss across all  levels. The lack of action on biodiversity can be attributed to the lack of  mainstreaming on what genetic resources mean for our livelihood, Leslie  Adams, the General Management of Protect Our Water and Environmental  Resources (POWER), told IPS. All 193 parties to the CBD are obliged to work towards this goal, yet without  the development of a baseline to measure against global trends, Wilson  pointed out that Canada does not have the means to report on whether  improvements have been made. Since 2008 Canada has worked at developing an Ecosystem Status and Trends  Assessment, which intends to assess the status of Canada’s ecosystems. POWER, which operates as a not-for profit organisation has been at the  forefront of ensuring water security and promoting education on biodiversity  at the community level. 'I don’t think people are aware within the federal government what the  convention represents and means,' Adams said.  'I think the only way we can  get more participation is if the government focuses on educating not only  communities, but parliamentarians and bureaucrats as well. '