As farmed fish consumption catches up on wild, a search for sustainable  aquaculture picks up steam. Some experts are predicting this is the year in which humans, globally, will  begin to consume more farmed seafood than wild-caught.  Whether the  milestone is reached this year or not, though, it is clear the trend is here to  stay and that - with wild fish stocks continuing to dwindle - aquaculture, or  fish farming, has a major role to play in ensuring global food security.  With  that in mind, work is being done to address the serious questions about  aquaculture’s negative impacts. Over the past several decades, wild-caught fish landings have widely  stagnated or declined, yet global seafood demand has continued to rise - as  has, due to aquaculture, global seafood supply.  The Food and Agriculture  Organisation (FAO) has predicted that, due to population growth, by 2030 we  will need an additional 37 million tonnes of farmed fish per year to maintain  the current levels of per capita seafood consumption. In response to this demand, aquaculture has already emerged as the fastest  growing food sector industry.  An industry that produced one million tons of  fish in 1950 has since emerged as a sprawling, 80 billion dollar-industry  producing over five times that amount of fish with operations around the  world. But its rapid growth has resulted in myriad environmental problems being  largely overlooked. 'What happens when you see that type of accelerated growth and when the  majority of that is coming from the developing world… sometimes you see a  greater emphasis on expansion and technology development as opposed to  conservation and sustainability and managing environmental and social  impacts,' said Jose Villalon, director of the World Wildlife Fund, based in the  U. S. The negative impacts are well documented.  Salmon farming, in which the fish  are usually raised in pens in the ocean, requires vast amounts of wild fish as  feed - about three pounds of feed fish for every pound of salmon produced.   The salmon waste, as well as antibiotics and additives used to make salmon  flesh pink can leak out and damage the surrounding environment.  Finally,  when farmed salmon escape, they can spread disease and contaminate the  gene pool of wild salmon. Other species can be farmed more sustainably, but even operations like  shrimp farming sometimes have impacts - like the removal of mangrove  habitat in order to set up farms.  This type of impact has hurt nearby  communities and the environment, especially in aquaculture hotspots in  Southeast Asia and in Chile. Still, the degree, as well as the type, of impact can vary widely depending on  the species and the methods used. 'When we’re talking about eating more aquaculture fish than wild-caught fish  we’re talking about all types of fish, including molluscs like mussels and  oysters.  Those are not as bad as raising carnivorous salmon in an open-net  pen,' noted Andrea Kavanagh, manager of the Pew Environment Group’s  marine aquaculture campaign. For now, the growth of the industry still seems to be largely outpacing the  development of more sustainable aquaculture methods, and regulations and  technical advances to mitigate those problems have so far been unable to  keep up.  But there is confidence that this gap can be overcome. Villalon, himself a 26-year veteran of the shrimp-farming industry, points to  a number of technical advances that have occurred in recent decades.  While  about a third of wild fish caught still go toward the fish meal and fish oil  needed to feed farmed fish, he says salmon aquaculture has seen almost a  halving of the feed-conversion ratios - the number of pounds of food needed  to produce one pound of farmed fish.  There has been a similar improvement  in the farming of shrimp, he says. Kavanagh pointed to advances in raising some freshwater salmon species in  closed-system inland pens in Washington State. 'I would hope that eventually there is going to be a more sustainable way to  raise salmon, given its popularity.  And I do think we are moving towards that  - I think we have to.  It’s not feasible for it to continue going the way it is,'  she told IPS. WWF has also spearheaded a joint effort by NGOs and producer groups to  form consensus on what sustainable aquaculture looks like for different  species.  The standards resulting from these Aquaculture Dialogues will be  used by a new group, the Aquaculture Stewardship Council, to certify certain  fish farming operations as sustainable and thus pressure ones that are not to  improve their practices. The results of the tilapia dialogue were released in December and the salmon  dialogue draft is expected to come out Jul.  28.  Villalon, who oversees the  dialogue project, told IPS the salmon standards will have seven principles that  farms will need to fulfil, dealing with everything from compliance with laws, to  conserving local biodiversity, to abiding by international labour standards. Setting out a list of standards like these is not a particularly new undertaking,  but Villalon says this effort is unique because of the broad group of  stakeholders involved and the measurability of operations’ compliance. He says there will be a clear threshold: 'You’re either compliant or you’re  not. 'And with many humans becoming increasingly dependent on farmed fish for  their protein, environmental NGOs are not the only ones concerned about the  way these fish are farmed. The Canadian government released new rules for fish farms in the province of  British Colombia this week following a court case that found fish farming off  the B. C.  coast impacted the ocean and thus was under federal jurisdiction. In Washington, D. C. , the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration is  in the process of developing an aquaculture policy that 'will provide a  foundation for sustainable aquaculture. ' Of the 47 percent of U. S.  seafood  consumption that comes from aquaculture, however, 42 percent is imported. International certifying organisations like the Accredited Standards Committee  (ASC) may therefore have a key role to play.  The ASC is expected to begin its  work in mid-2010, though certification of tilapia farms on an interim basis  will start sooner. 