Turtles, frogs, toads and many kinds of birds are imported into Mexico as pets by  the thousands every year, but they constitute an environmental and economic  threat when they are invasive exotic species. Since April a reform of the General Law on Wildlife has prohibited imports of  such species, but in practice Mexico continues to allow these animals to enter  the country.  Pet shops rely on them for their lucrative trade. 'The only way to combat invasive species is to effectively ban their sale,  because eradication would cost millions of dollars,' María Elena Sánchez,  head of the environmental non-governmental organisation (NGO) Teyeliz, told  IPS.  'This kind of import ban works very well.  And it is necessary for national  security and food security. 'Invasive species are animals, plants or other organisms introduced by human  beings into alien habitats, where they establish themselves and spread  causing damage.  Typically they have great powers of adaptation and  reproduction. Since the mid-1990s, when markets were opened to foreign trade, Mexico  has become a big importer of birds, amphibians and reptiles.  Between 2005  and 2010, import permits were granted to bring in some 960,000 wild birds.   In 2009 alone, over 239,000 birds were imported from abroad. 'It’s an alarming phenomenon.  Mexico has become an importer of exotic  wildlife species.  The growth of imports has been absolutely exponential.   Prices are accessible, and wider distribution has enlarged the market,' Juan  Carlos Cantú, head of Mexico programmes for Defenders of Wildlife, a  Washington-based NGO, told IPS. The state National Commission for the Knowledge and Use of Biodiversity  (CONABIO) has identified at least 800 invasive species in the country,  including more than 600 plant species.  The rest are fish, amphibians, reptiles,  birds and mammals. One of the environmental organisations' concerns is the monk parakeet  (Myiopsitta monachus), a native of southern South America, which is regarded  as highly invasive and an agricultural pest.  Between 2005 and 2010, some  126,260 of these parakeets were imported. These wild parrots make communal nests in the angles of house roofs or on  electricity cables in streets.  After reproducing in great numbers, they wreak  havoc on maize and sorghum plantations or fruit tree orchards.   Environmentalists have documented their presence in the wild in the southern  Mexican state of Oaxaca. In Mexico, approximately 10 million reptiles and amphibians, most of them  turtles, are purchased abroad every year for the pet market.  There is a risk  they may carry diseases harmful to human health, or to that of local wildlife,  according to ecologists. Experts have noted a fungus in pet frogs and toads which causes  chytridiomycosis, an infection of the skin in amphibians that is transmitted  through water. This fungus has spread from the United States to Costa Rica; and to the  southern Mexican states of Chiapas, Tabasco, Campeche and Oaxaca.  Quite frequently, pet owners tire of them and release them in streets, parks,  fields or watercourses, where the animals settle, reproduce and may become  dominant. Article 8h of the Convention on Biological Diversity - an international legally- binding treaty which came into force in 1993 and has been ratified by Mexico  - says that states party shall 'prevent the introduction of, control or eradicate  those alien species which threaten ecosystems, habitats or species. 'In a few weeks’ time, the government will publish the ‘National Strategy on  Invasive Species in Mexico: Prevention, control and eradication. ’ It held public  consultations on a draft version of this document in the first quarter of this  year. During the consultation process it became clear that there was a lack of  knowledge about the impact of invasive species, a lack of institutional  coordination, no systems for monitoring and early detection, gaps and  inconsistencies in the regulations, and shortcomings in import controls and in  the control of the expansion of these species. 'One of the most common problems is exotic species that reach a body of  fresh water, like the suckermouth catfish (Hypostomus plecostomus), varieties  of tilapia (Oreochromis), bigmouth bass (Micropterus salmoides) and even  brown trout (Salmo trutta fario),' said Sánchez. 'Once permission is given, the authorities do not monitor the effects that  these alien species have,' Cantú emphasised. Mexico is well aware of what can happen when invasive species enter it and  proliferate.  In 2006, the nopal moth (Cactoblastis cactorum), an insect native  to South America, was found on the islands of Mujeres and Contoy, more than  1,000 kilometres southeast of the Mexican capital.  The larva of the nopal  moth feeds on the nopal plant, destroying it in the process. Mexico has 38 native species of nopal or prickly pear, a cactus plant that has  become a major national symbol.  The nopal is a food source with a thousand- and-one uses, and a staple of the Mexican diet.  As such, it is widely  cultivated on some three million hectares, and provides a livelihood to  thousands of farmers. The government took action against this threat with a campaign to eradicate  the pest, and declared the moth eliminated from the area in 2009. Another example is that of the gilthead sea bream (Sparus aurata), a native of  the Mediterranean Sea and a highly prized dish, which was accidentally  released in 2008 into the waters of the Gulf of California, northwest of the  Mexican capital.  Some of these exotic fish escaped from cages at an Israeli  fish farm, and have since proliferated. It is feared that, as a predatory alien species, it may decimate populations of  local fish that only reproduce in this particular gulf.  Monitoring of sea bream  catches in the area is under way. Among the goals for 2020 proposed by the government in the strategy  document that was circulated for consultation, are the enforcement of laws  regulating the introduction and management of invasive species, and  identification and surveillance of entry points and diffusion routes for species  posing the highest risks. The executive branch also wishes to create standardised mechanisms and  protocols to reduce the risk of entry, establishment and dissemination of  invasive species, and to replace them with native species, or those entailing  lower risks. 