Clay or earthen bricks could help to alleviate the housing shortage in Brazil  because of the lower cost of brick buildings, while an innovative process for  producing what are known as 'ecological bricks' can avoid the environmental  harm arising from more usual building materials. In Pavão-Pavãozinho, a ‘favela’ (shanty town) on one of the hills in Rio de  Janeiro, plans are underway for three low-cost housing blocks to replace  homes at risk from land slippage, as well as those in the way of planned  walkways or streets. These works, part of Brazilian President Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva’s Programme  to Accelerate Growth (PAC), are also being carried out in other Rio de Janeiro  favelas and other parts of the country, with police pacification units and social  programmes being introduced at the same time to fight drug trafficking. At first glance these look like any other construction sites.  But the walls are  the colour of terracotta or red ochre: the same colour as the earth used to  make the 'ecological' bricks. Francisco Casanova, a professor of civil engineering at the Federal University  of Rio de Janeiro (UFRJ), is an enthusiastic advocate of this building material  and has devoted the last years of his professional life to researching and  developing it. He pointed out that the technique is at least as old as ancient Egyptian  civilisation.  In Brazil, the first building using this kind of brick was built in  1942.  In Europe, brick was used as a building material by the poorest in times  of war and its aftermath, he said. According to Casanova, who works at the Postgraduate Engineering Centre at  the UFRJ, brick-making techniques have been taken up again and improved.   New knowledge about mixers, additives and the compacting process is now  used to increase brick quality and compressive strength. 'It’s all very advanced compared with the past,' said the engineer, who also  does research on different low-cost building materials, like roof tiles made of  wood or other plant matter. Ecological bricks nowadays contain 50 percent earth, 15 to 20 percent sand  and only 10 percent portland cement, as well as other ingredients. According to Casanova, using bricks brings down the cost of a building by up  to 30 percent.  'After all, earth can be found everywhere,' he smiled. Unlike traditional bricks, these do not need to be fired in a wood- or gas- burning kiln.  This saves up to 90 percent of greenhouse gas emissions,  responsible for global warming, that would otherwise be produced.  And it  also helps to prevent deforestation, Casanova told IPS. The bricks are made in a factory in Magé, a municipality in the north of the  state of Rio de Janeiro.  Manufacturer Miguel Ángel Lasa designed a special  machine to prepare the mix and press it into a mould. There is no shortage of raw material.  The first step in the process is the  arrival of a truck loaded with local earth.  The earth costs only 10 reals (5. 55  dollars) per cubic metre, transport included. Demolition rubble, crushed and sieved until it has the texture of instant coffee  powder, is added to the earth.  In the machine, additives for cohesion and  strength are mixed with the earth, rubble, sand, lime and portland cement.   Then the bricks are pressed to 90 percent of the mould volume. The bricks are cured by hydration, simply by immersion in water, and left to  settle for between seven and 14 days.  The colour and odour of the bricks is  that of wet earth.  The factory smells of wet earth. This type of material also reduces construction costs, Lasa emphasised.  'In a  traditional building, bricks are only used as a finish for the walls, but with this  system, cement is only used for structural parts like load-bearing beams,' he  said. Another advantage that saves money is that plumbing and electric cable pipes  can be fitted through the gaps between the bricks instead of having to break  up the walls. Bricks also provide thermal insulation and soundproofing, said Casanova.  A  30-centimetre thick wall absorbs 56 decibels, he said. 'In regions where there are high temperatures, brick houses stay cool.  We  confirmed this personally in a completed flat in Pavão-Pavãozinho, on a day  when it was 37 degrees outside,' he said. As these bricks 'give an attractive finish,' they do not require plaster or paint,  just a coat of varnish or resin, the engineer said. According to Lasa, demand for these bricks is increasing, and not just for  low-cost housing but also for luxurious homes and hotels that invest in  environmental quality. In Casanova's view, 'political and economic interests' currently work against a  mass return to using bricks for low-cost housing.  Brick buildings save not only on cement, but also on other construction  materials like iron, wire, nails and plaster.  This is not in the interests of either  big industry or construction material suppliers, he emphasised.  By his  calculation, Brazil produces 50 million tonnes of cement a year, and 70  percent of that amount is used by low-income do-it-yourself builders who,  like ants, patiently build their homes a little at a time. Production is also a problem.  For large construction projects, like the state  PAC projects, factories need to supply about 10 million ecological bricks in  less than 12 months, and they cannot meet this demand, he said. The state Brazilian Institute of Geography and Statistics (IBGE) indicates that  the housing deficit in Brazil is 7. 2 million units. The present Lula administration launched a programme aimed at reducing the  housing deficit by 14 percent by the end of its term of office in December, a  goal which experts say is unlikely to be met. 