The Barack Obama administration has found success in passing  healthcare reform and legislation touted as an 'overhaul' of  the U. S.  financial system, but last week it became clear that  the Democrats wouldn't advance a climate change bill until  after the August recess and, more likely, until next year. On Jul.  22, Senate Majority Leader Sen.  Harry Reid announced  that Senate Democrats would not take up the climate bill  before the August recess. Reid told reporters that Democrats simply did not have the  votes to move forward on the legislation, which would have  reduced carbon emissions but encountered wide opposition  among Republican lawmakers and some Democrats. When Obama took office in January 2009, hopes were high for  those who wanted to see the U. S.  pass legislation to limit  carbon emissions. With Democrats in control of the House and the Copenhagen  climate conference coming up, it seemed liked the pieces  were in place for a climate bill which would put the U. S.  in  a leadership position in reducing global carbon emissions. But a brutal partisan battle over healthcare reform, a  financial reform package that was only passed this month,  and the BP oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico - and the ensuing  legislation to guarantee payments from BP - have all pushed  the climate bill further down the road. House and Senate Democrats are expected to suffer  significant losses in the upcoming November elections which  will add to the White House's difficulty in passing a  climate bill in 2011. Fred Krupp, the president of the Environmental Defense Fund,  expressed disappointment with Reid's announcement and  emphasised that the Senate's failure to address climate  change could mean that those seeking an effective climate  bill will be fighting an uphill battle next year. 'To pass legislation, you need to move bills through both  houses of Congress.  The House of Representatives has already  cast a clear, solid vote on this.  If the Senate fails to act  now, all that hard work will have been wasted and we'll have  to start from scratch next year with a new Congress likely  to be less inclined to act responsibly,' wrote Krupp on his  blog. 'Senate inaction will have very serious consequences for our  environment, our economy, and, ultimately, our entire  civilization,' he warned. The inability of Democrats in Washington to pass a climate  bill will likely have broad implications for the  international momentum to pass climate change legislation. Already, the upcoming meeting of international negotiators  in Cancun, in November, is being described as an  increasingly unlikely venue for the signing of an  international climate agreement. 'Cap-and-trade legislation aimed at curbing greenhouse gas  emissions appears to be dead in this Congress.  Even a  moderately ambitious alternative has been shelved until  later this year at the earliest,' wrote Michael A.  Levi,  director of the Program on Energy Security and Climate  Change at the Council on Foreign Relations. 'The biggest implication is that the United States has once  again failed to confront its climate problems.  But there is  another: the United States is in for a rocky time in  international climate diplomacy,' he continued. Representatives from developing nations, which included  ministers from Brazil, South Africa, India and China,  currently meeting in Rio de Janeiro said on Monday that  developed countries haven't done enough to battle climate  change. In the past the group - which had joined the U. S.  in forming  the Copenhagen Accord -had said that developed nations  should submit emissions reduction targets for 2020 and  participate in national emission curbing legislation. If, as seems to be the case, a climate change bill is not  brought up in the Senate before the August recess, it is  unlikely that developing countries can expect a definitive  climate agreement in Cancun in November. Environmental NGOs here in Washington have been loudly  claiming that the opportunity is not yet gone for a climate  bill this year and that the costs of inaction are too high  to accept. 'It's time for all of U. S.  - politicians, business leaders  and environmentalists - to put wishful thinking aside,  establish realistic goals and develop a consensus for  legislation that can be passed this year,' wrote president  of the Pew Center on Global Climate Change Eileen Claussen  and Duke Energy chair Jim Rogers in an op-ed for Politico on  Friday. 'Current clean energy and climate legislation is not an all- or-nothing proposition.  It's a work in progress that can  begin our transition to a clean energy future.  We need to  look past our differences and act where there is agreement,'  they concluded. But on Monday, warnings from developing countries coming  from Rio de Janeiro suggested that the rest of the world was  beginning to seriously doubt the Obama administration's  ability to pass a climate bill by November. 'If by the time we get to Cancun (U. S.  senators) still have  not completed the legislation then clearly we will get less  than a legally binding outcome,' Buyelwa Sonjica, South  Africa's Water and Environment Affairs minister, said in an  interview with Reuters. 'For us that is a concern, and we're very realistic about  the fact that we may not' complete a legally binding accord,  she said. 