Dark oil slicks are spreading from the middle of Venezuela's Lake Maracaibo  towards the shores -- the wetlands, mangroves, beaches and docks.  Oil is  permeating fishing nets, coating the garbage dumped into the water, killing off  wildlife and driving away residents and tourists. 'My sons would set out the nets and at dawn would bring in mullet and  corvina fish to sell to small restaurants in Puerto Caballo.  They stopped  several months ago because what they caught were blackened and damaged,'  Adelso Silva, an elderly fisherman from Santa Cruz de Mara, near the city of  Maracaibo, capital of Zulia state. Located in northwest Venezuela and connected by a natural channel to the  Caribbean Sea, Lake Maracaibo is the largest in South America, with a surface  area of 12,800 square kilometres and a volume of 245 billion cubic metres of  water.  The shoreline and lakebed have been the sites of intense petroleum  production since the second decade of the 20th century. According to Ricardo Coronado and Ramiro Ramírez, board members of the  government-run oil company Petróleos de Venezuela (PDVSA), there are  6,000 active wells in the lake, producing 700,000 barrels (159 litres each) of  crude per day.  They are connected by about 45,000 km of pipeline, in a  gigantic underwater metallic web.  There are another 4,000 inactive wells. There have always been leaks of petroleum or natural gas from that huge  network of pipes, according to sources from the industry, environmentalists  and residents of the region.  But since May the patches of oil have increased,  as has their effect on people who make their livelihood from the lake. 'It's increasingly difficult to catch a fish that isn't blemished.  Fifteen years ago  I would catch up to 90 kilograms of fish in a day.  Today, if I'm lucky, it's 10,'  said Javier Araujo, a fisherman from Cabimas, the principal city on the east  shore of the lake.  He has been spending his evenings using gasoline to clean  his crude-soaked nets. 'Some 13,000 fishers are the ones most harmed by this disaster, which is  present over eight percent of the lake's surface.  It affects our entire  relationship with this body of water, including the decline in oil production,'  Eliseo Fermín, president of the Zulia state legislature, and member of the  political opposition.  Rafael Ramírez, minister of Energy and Petroleum as well as president of  PDVSA, denied that it is a disaster: 'It's a chronic problem.  It's not a spill --  they are leaks, and the leaks we have in the lake are no more than eight  barrels daily.  What is exceptional is that this situation, which has been  ongoing, has now been brought to the fore. ' In the last three months, 'we have repaired an average of 117 leaks per week'  under the water and PDVSA hired some 3,000 fishers to help in collecting the  oil and further clean-up, acknowledged the official. Fisherman Silva said, 'They collect scrap metal and garbage, but also quite a  bit of crude.  Some days I've watched them bring in enough to fill some trucks  and they take it to PDVSA warehouses. ''It's a hard job, it pays 100 bolívares (23 dollars according to the official  exchange rate) a day, but without any other benefits, and PDVSA prefers  fishers or residents who are with the PSUV,' the governing United Socialist  Party of Venezuela, he said. Fermín commented that the fishers 'don't have the expertise, the experience  or the equipment needed to collect spilled petroleum and clean up the  mangroves and wetlands, which are breeding sites for fish, crabs and prawns. ''The damage and its causes persist whether the leak is one barrel or 100.  And  the problem has a key word: maintenance,' engineer Diego González told IPS.   He has worked in the industry 38 years and is a professor of graduate courses  in hydrocarbons in several Venezuelan universities. 'There have always been leaks and spills in the lake, as a problem associated  with oil production, but the operating companies used to take immediate  action to repair the faults.  That no longer happens,' said González. 'In the past, PDVSA and other operators admitted the leaks and paid  compensation to the fishers.  Now they stopped paying,' he said. 'To recognise 117 repairs a week gives an idea of the number of leaks  admitted by Ramírez just 22 days after our complaints.  What they have is  improvisation and neglect in attending to pipelines that are 50 years old or  more,' Gustavo Carrasquel, of the Zulia environmental organisation Azul  Ambientalistas, told IPS. In Fermín's opinion, 'the problem is intimately related to the expropriation --  really the confiscation -- of dozens of contracting companies (ordered by  President Hugo Chávez a year and a half ago) that were the ones doing the  maintenance and repairs of the wells in the lake, and which, under PDVSA  orders, have stopped operating. ' 'A few years ago, 135 boats were going out every day to monitor the  installations.  Now there are just 15 or so.  Since 2003, when the petroleum  employees failed in their strike to get Chávez to resign, overflights of the lake  have been banned -- the helicopters can't monitor what is happening,' said  Fermín. González agreed that PDVSA 'doesn't carry out the maintenance that the  contract companies used to, and an ordinary problem in the industry turns  into an extraordinary situation of pollution, a decline in production and loss  of income for thousands of people. ''In addition to the petroleum leaks, there are gas leaks, and that translates  into a loss of pressure in the wells, which then run their course more quickly,  ultimately reducing production and lowering the country's current and  potential revenues,' said lawmaker Fermín. According to activist Carrasquel, 'the petroleum pollution is just one of the  plagues on the lake. ''Other problems include the dredging of the shipping canal that connects  Lake Maracaibo to the Gulf of Venezuela and the Caribbean Sea, with the  resulting salinisation; the phosphates that come from fertilisers and  insecticides used in farming in the south; and the wastewater from the cities  on the eastern shore,' he said. 'The first thing the government should do is let the non-governmental  organisations take action.  Then it should recognise the problem and, with  broad participation, elaborate a management plan -- and decide if we want to  sacrifice the lake for the production of fossil fuels or vice versa,' stated  Carrasquel.  