Northern Thai villagers living on Mekong River’s banks are  poised to join a growing tide of opposition against a planned  cascade of 11 dams to be built on the mainstream of South-east  Asia’s largest body of water.    These communities, many of them from the northern Thai  province of Chiang Rai, are drafting a petition to be  submitted in the coming weeks to Thai Prime Minister Abhisit  Vejjajiva.  They see this step as the first in a long battle  to protect a riverine culture and livelihood that has come  down generations.    The target of the Thai villagers’ ire is the Sayaboury  dam, to be built across a part of the Mekong that flows  through neighbouring Laos.  In opposing it, they are coming  up against powerful Thai interests behind this dam project.    The 1,260-megawatt Sayaboury dam is the one in the most  advanced planning stage among the 11 dams, followed by the  360-mw Don Sahong dam, which is also in Laos, where nine of  the lower Mekong dams are to be built.  Two other dams on the  river’s mainstream are planned in Cambodia.    The backers of the Sayaboury dam include a Thai-based dam  developer, four Thai commercial banks that are reported to  have pledged funds for the dam and the Electricity  Generating Authority of Thailand (EGAT), a state utility  that signed an agreement in Laos in June to buy power once  the new dam’s turbines come to life.    'The local communities are upset at the direct  involvement of Thailand in a dam that could permanently  damage their livelihood,' said Pianporn Deetes, coordinator  of Save the Mekong Coalition, a Bangkok-based network of  environmentalist and grassroots activists.  'Their fishing  livelihood will be affected, because the dams across the  Mekong’s mainstream will damage fish migration patterns for  spawning. '   The petition will challenge the Abhisit government to  reveal its position on this dam and to explain if it  consulted locals, Pianporn told IPS.  'Local communities have  no faith in fish ladders being built at the dam site to help  fish migration.  They know how such technology failed with  the Pak Mun dam in Thailand. '   For now, history is on the side of the villagers, since  the mainstream of the lower Mekong, which is shared by  Thailand, Laos, Cambodia and Vietnam, has been free of  massive hydropower barriers.  The only dams that cut across  the river — and have enraged the 60 million people in the  lower Mekong — are three large ones in its upper reaches  that flow through China.    Thus, the Sayaboury dam has emerged as a benchmark to  gauge which of the competing interests will prevail in the  still unresolved debate about the 11 mainstream dams and  their impact on local communities and the environment.    Beyond these, activists say the dam will condemn to  extinction a much-storied icon of the river — the Mekong  giant catfish. 'The Mekong giant catfish is a critically endangered species  that will not survive if it cannot migrate through the  Sayaboury dam,' said the World Wildlife Fund (WWF) in  describing a 'critical spawning area' close to the dam site  near Chiang Rai and the Lao province of Bokeo.    'This area is one of the last places in the world where  the critically endangered Mekong giant catfish is found  spawning in the wild,' the WWF added in a report it released  this week, ‘River of Giants: Giant Fish of the Mekong’.    The last time a Mekong giant catfish was sighted was in  May 2009, near a section of the river that flows through the  northern Thai district of Chiang Khong, says Trang Dang,  WWF’s Mekong River ecoregion coordinator, in describing a  fish that tips the scale at 350 kilogrammes.    These fish, whose numbers have dwindled by up to 95  percent over the past century, journey upriver from the  Tonle Sap lake in Cambodia to spawning areas near Chiang Rai  once the monsoons begin in May, covering distances of nearly  1,000 km at times.    The giant catfish is one of four large freshwater fish  that inhabit the Mekong, the other three being the giant  barb, the dog-eating catfish and the largest of them all,  the giant freshwater stingray, which measures half the  length of a bus and weighs 600 kg.  'The world’s biggest  freshwater fish and four out of the top 10 giant freshwater  fish species can be found in the Mekong River,' noted the  WWF study.  'More giants inhabit this mighty river than any  other on earth. '   But for now, the Thai villagers and environmentalists may  be able to take heart from a comment by a Lao official.  'We  have studied so many planned dam construction projects, but  there has been no decision to build any so far.  The two dam  projects in Sayaboury and southern Laos near the Cambodian  border have been studied,' Lao Minister of Energy and Mines  Soulivong Daravong was quoted by media reports as saying in  July.    But while the construction of the Sayaboury dam remains  uncertain, what is clear is the growing role of the private  sector in dam development, replacing institutions like the  World Bank and the Asian Development Bank that used to lead  such investments.    This shift presents new challenges to activists bent on  protecting the Mekong River, which begins its 4,880-km  journey from the Tibetan plateau, through southern China,  and then Burma, before coursing into the Mekong basin, and  emptying out into the South China Sea in southern Vietnam.    'When hydropower development becomes private sector led,  where profit is the main motive, it leads to hydro chaos,'  said Carl Middleton, Mekong programme coordinator of the  U. S. -based environmental watchdog International Rivers.   'Each developer is trying to develop their own project to  generate the cheapest electricity. '   'It is not an integrated approach, balancing the needs of  Laos and addressing environmental and social concerns,' he  added.  