In early July, whales from the world’s largest population of  humpbacks began arriving in the warm, subtropical waters off  Australia’s north-west coast to breed and nurse their young.    From May each year, some 22,000 humpbacks make the  pilgrimage up Australia’s west coast from their Antarctic  feeding grounds before beginning the return journey in  September.    The whales, which usually grow to between 12 and 16  metres when mature, constitute just a tiny fraction of the  wide variety of life supported by Australia’s marine  ecosystem, considered to be the most biologically diverse on  the planet.    But in recent months, environmentalists around Australia  have been expressing concern that the marine environment is  largely unprotected from threats like overfishing and the  exploration and production of oil and gas.     While the government of Prime Minister Julia Gillard is  aiming to have a system of marine reserves in place by 2012,  less than five percent of Australia’s Exclusive Economic  Zone is currently protected.    For the Aug.  21 general election, green groups are  calling on the two major parties, Gillard’s Australian Labor  Party and the conservative opposition coalition, to commit  to establishing an extensive network of large marine parks  immediately in order to safeguard the humpback whales’  breeding grounds and other important marine environments.     'Numerous scientific and economic reports have  demonstrated that a network of marine sanctuaries will  protect marine life, help to make fisheries sustainable and  bring long-term economic benefits,' said Piers Verstegen,  director of the Conservation Council of Western Australia  (CCWA), the state’s peak environment organisation, on  Jul. 17.    In October 2009, Western Australia’s leader, Premier  Colin Barnett, announced that his state government intended  to declare the humpbacks’ breeding area 'a (protected)  marine park'.  But action has yet to be taken on this.    'There has been delay after delay and everything we are  hearing is that protective measures within the park are  being watered down,' said the Wilderness Society’s Peter  Robertson.    'There is every indication that commercial fishing will  continue throughout the marine park, putting marine life at  risk,' he added.    Of additional concern to environmental groups is the  federal government’s continued release of offshore areas for  oil and gas exploration.  In May, Minister for Resources and  Energy Martin Ferguson announced the release of 31 marine  areas across five submarine basins for petroleum  exploration.    Twenty-six of these areas are in waters off Western  Australia.    'These are primarily in deep water and as we’ve seen in  the Gulf of Mexico, the industry is completely ill-equipped  to deal with deepwater oil spills and oil blowouts,' the  CCWA’s Tim Nicol told IPS.    Described by U. S.  President Barack Obama as an  'unprecedented' environmental disaster, an April explosion  on the Deepwater Horizon oil rig - owned by oil giant  British Petroleum - in the Gulf of Mexico killed 11 people  and led to the uncontrolled leaking of millions of barrels  of oil into the sea.    While the flow of oil appears to have been halted,  concerns remain over the short and long-term environmental  consequences of the massive spill.     Australia has not been without its own spills.  Following  a blowout at the Montara wellhead platform in the Timor Sea  off Western Australia’s northern coast in August 2009, oil  and gas leaked for some 74 days before being plugged.    The Australian Greens party and World Wildlife Fund- Australia say the spill was worse than the government has  hitherto admitted.     Martin Ferguson, the resources minister, commissioned an  inquiry into the incident - the report of which he received  on Jun. 18 - but remains tight-lipped on the subject.  A  ministerial official contacted by IPS would give no  indication as to when the report will be publicly released.     One of the zones made available for exploration is  located at the Mentelle Basin off Western Australia’s south- west coast, some 70 kilometres from Margaret River, which  boasts clear water and pristine beaches.  The Margaret River  region, a few hours’ drive south of the state capital Perth,  is also a renowned wine-growing region.    Environmentalists warn that any oil or gas leaks in the  Mentelle Basin would likely have a disastrous effect on the  local economy, similar to what has occurred along areas of  the United States’ coast.    And like the Gulf of Mexico spill, local marine life  would also suffer.  The Mentelle Basin is in 'an area of  important deepwater habitat,' according to Nicol.  'It’s the  area where the southern right whales and humpback whales and  even blue whales migrate through every year. '   But the government has so far rejected calls for a  moratorium on the release of acreage for petroleum  exploration.  Ferguson said that stopping the process would  'do nothing to improve industry safety. '   'All petroleum exploration and development activities are  subject to stringent environmental standards, approvals and  reporting requirements set out in petroleum-specific  environmental legislation,' said the minister when the  acreage release was announced.    Ferguson has also linked oil and gas exploration to  Australia’s energy security, a point supported by the  Australian Petroleum Production and Exploration Association  (APPEA), the industry’s peak representative body.      'Australia’s oil production peaked ten years ago.  From  meeting nearly 100 percent of Australia’s needs in 2000, we  have fallen (to) just over 55 percent in 2010.  And without  major new discoveries, it’s anticipated to be just 32  percent by 2017,' said APPEA’s chief executive Belinda  Robinson.  