The oceans are the lifeblood of our planet and plankton its  red blood cells.  Those vital 'red blood cells' have declined  more than 40 percent since 1950 and the rate of decline is  increasing due to climate change, scientists reported this  week. 'Phytoplankton are a critical part of our planetary life  support system.  They produce half of the oxygen we breathe,  draw down surface CO2, and ultimately support all of our  fisheries,' said Boris Worm of Canada's Dalhousie University  and one of the world's leading experts on the global oceans.  'An ocean with less phytoplankton will function  differently,' said Worm, the co-author of a new study on  plankton published this week in Nature.  Plankton are the equivalent of grass, trees and other plants  that make land green, says study co-author Marlon Lewis, an  oceanographer at Dalhousie.  'It is frightening to realise we  have lost nearly half of the ocean's green plants,' Lewis  told IPS.  'It looks like the rate of decline is increasing,' he said. Climate change is warming the oceans about 0. 2C per decade  on average.  This warmer water tends to stay on top because  it is lighter and essentially sits on top of a layer of  colder water.  This layering, or stratification, is a problem  for light-loving plankton because they can only live in the  top 100 to 200 meters. Eventually they run out of nutrients to feed on unless the  cold, deeper waters mix with those near the surface.  Ocean  stratification has been widely observed in the past decade  and is occurring in more and larger areas of the world's  oceans.  Phytoplankton or plankton are very small algae that live  near the surface of oceans and form the basis of the marine  food web.  The unheralded plankton tribe may be the hardest- working group of organisms on the planet.  Not only do they  feed nearly everything living in the oceans, they absorb and  sequester CO2 from the atmosphere, they also play a key role  in cloud formation. Plankton give off dimethyl sulfide, a chemical which floats  to the ocean's surface, evaporates, breaking down into  sulfur compounds that become the nuclei around which clouds  form. Without plankton, the Earth would be a very different  planet. The researchers spent three years analysing and synthesising  an unprecedented collection of historical and recent  oceanographic data involving nearly half a million  measurements of the transparency of sea water over the past  120 years.  Previously, the 'big picture' regarding plankton  globally only went as far back as 1997 with the launch of  special satellites. Worm, Lewis and colleague Daniel Boyce found that most  phytoplankton declines occurred in polar and tropical  regions, and in the open oceans where most phytoplankton  production occurs.  There was a direct correlation between  rising sea surface temperatures and the decline in  phytoplankton growth over most of the globe, especially  close to the equator, they determined.   'With ocean temperatures increasing we had been wondering  what the impacts might be,' Worm told IPS in an interview in  Potsdam, Germany. In addition to the declines in plankton, declines in the  numbers of species in tropical waters and increases in the  number of species in temperate waters have been observed, he  said.  As on land, some marine species are exquisitely  sensitive to temperature and will move if a region becomes  too warm.  Another related mega-change in the oceans is the dramatic  increase in number and size of dead zones - areas too low in  oxygen to support life.  Fertiliser and sewage run-off cause  huge growth of plankton, which then quickly die and are  consumed by bacteria that deplete waters of oxygen.  The Gulf  of Mexico has a 22,000 square kilometre dead zone every  spring due to run-off from the Mississippi River.  Ocean stratification, where warm water sits firmly on top of  cold, nutrient-rich water, also creates dead zones and  lowers the overall productivity of the oceans, says Worm.   Such dead zones were rare 40 years ago but now number  several hundred.  Without urgent action, climate change will  continue to warm oceans, increasing stratification and  producing larger and more dead zones with a major impact on  future fisheries, a 2009 study in Nature Geoscience warned. It will take a thousand years for the oceans to cool down,  so it is imperative to pull the emergency brake on global  warming emissions, the study concluded.  Another pressing reason to pull the emergency brake is the  increasing acidification of oceans due to human emissions of  CO2.  Each day, the oceans absorb 30 million tonnes of CO2,  gradually and inevitably increasing their acidity, which in  turn reduces the amounts of calcium carbonate available to  some plankton and other species that need it to form their  shells and skeletons. There is no controversy about this basic chemistry.  The only  debate is about the extent and timing of the impacts.  Recent  research in the Arctic previously reported by IPS suggests  that within 10 years, parts of the Arctic Ocean will be too  acidic for most species.  Lewis agreed acidification is a major threat to some species  of plankton but said their study was not able to  specifically identify the impacts.  The only way to reduce ocean acidification is with  substantial cuts in emissions of CO2, say experts like  Australia's Ove Hoegh-Guldberg, director of the Global  Change Institute at the University of Queensland.  Hoegh-Guldberg co-authored a review of dozens of studies on  the state of the oceans in Science magazine Jun.  18.  It  paints a terrifying picture of the global oceans rapidly  sliding towards a 'fundamental and irreversible ecological  transformation' not seen in millions of years.    'We need to cut global emissions by five percent per annum  starting right now,' he writes along with co-author John  Bruno, an associate professor at the University of North  Carolina. Inaction is not an option given the huge consequences, but  fortunately we already know what to do, they say.  National  support for creating competitive renewable energy supplies  and halting deforestation in Brazil and Indonesia would  result in major reductions of greenhouse gas emissions.  Protecting and restoring coastal vegetation, including  mangroves, salt marsh and sea grasses - dubbed 'blue carbon'  - would maintain or increase the ability of marine  ecosystems to capture and permanently store carbon dioxide.  'Furthermore, all of these solutions have huge benefits for  people and biodiversity,' they conclude. 