The controversial firing of an African-American federal  government employee over comments misconstrued to be racist  has refocused attention on the plight of black farmers in the  U. S.  South. Shirley Sherrod, head of USDA's Rural Development Office in  Georgia, resigned earlier this month after a right-wing  blogger, Andrew Breitbart, posted a video of Sherrod making  comments admitting she once had hesitated in helping a poor,  white farmer who needed help. 'I was struggling with the fact that so many black people  have lost their farmland and here I was faced with having to  help a white person save their land, so I didn't give him  the full force of what I could do.   I did enough,' Sherrod  said in the remarks. However, the full 45-minute video shows her speech, in its  totality, was about the need for black and white people to  come together and to realise their common plight.   She says  she learned white farmers needed help too, and she  eventually scrambled at the last minute to help him. Sherrod resigned after being confronted by her supervisors  at the U. S.  Department of Agriculture (USDA), who were  fearful the right-wing media, including Fox News, would have  a field day. Due to public outcry, the USDA offered her a new job and  President Barack Obama called her personally to apologise. Sherrod is still considering whether to take the new  position, and has announced she is planning to sue Breitbart  for libel. The incident has indirectly brought the plight of farmers in  the U. S.  to light.   But some of the black farmers who  originally sued the USDA in 1997 believe the public is still  not getting the full story. 'When the Pigford case was brought about, it was because  black farmers were losing about 1,000 acres of farmland a  day,' Gary Grant, president of the Black Farmers and  Agriculturalists Association in North Carolina, told IPS.    'The majority of the folks went out of business because of  the discriminatory and racist actions of the agents of the  USDA. 'The USDA engaged in 'not giving access to loans, not giving  access to programmes, not giving access to emergency loans,  not giving loans in the full amount needed, slowing the  process. ''The stories never got told - USDA agent's offices with  nooses hanging on the wall, neckties with the Confederate  flag on it, all kinds of subtleties of 'boy, don't forget  where you are',' Grant said.   'Not one of them has been  fired, not one of them has been demoted. 'The 1997 Pigford v.  Glickman case against the USDA was  settled out of court.   Under a federal judge's terms dating  to 1999, qualified farmers could receive 50,000 dollars each  to settle claims of racial bias.   They also could have any  existing debt to the USDA on any outstanding loans on  farmland forgiven. As previously reported by IPS in 2004, many farmers had been  systematically denied the payments the USDA had promised to  them.  According to John Zippert, director of Programme Operations  in the Federation for Southern Cooperatives's Alabama  office, '22,000 people filed during [a six-month window in  1999].   Of those, about 15,000 were unsuccessful. '  Some of  those people were able to appeal successfully while others  were not, he said. In February 2010, the USDA under the Barack Obama  administration negotiated a second round of settlement  payments to the black farmers. 'In the consent decree, you could file a late petition.   And  there are 60,000 to 70,000 who filed in that period. . .  It's  hard to say, but my estimate. . .  about half of those people  are qualified to file a claim,' Zippert said. 'In the 2008 farm bill was a provision which would allow a  new action for people who filed a late claim.   This has been  called Pigford 2.   The Department of Justice which  represents the Department of Agriculture, basically reached  a settlement for 1. 25 billion.   100 million was in the farm  bill.   There is still a need for 1 billion, 150 million.    We're trying to get that,' Zippert said. At least twice the U. S.  House has approved the funding, but  it has not yet come up for a vote in the U. S.  Senate.   Still, not all the black farmers who participated in the  lawsuit were satisfied with the settlement. 'The farmers themselves objected to the consent agreement  back in 1999.   At a fairness hearing on March 04, about 700  farmers came to Washington, DC, from across the country.   In  excess of 40 spoke telling the judge the consent decree  would do more to harm than the discrimination already  endured.   And still, the judge said it was a fair,  reasonable, and an adequate settlement,' Grant said. A 50,000-dollar payment did not fully compensate many of the  farmers, some of whose land was worth more than that, not to  mention loss of annual income. 'We didn't want 50,000 dollars.   We wanted our land back.    They had land in inventory.   They may not be willing to give  back the same land, but if they had land in inventory, why  couldn't they give that to me?' Grant said. One of the original plaintiffs in the Pigford lawsuit,  Lucious Abrams, told IPS many of the original plaintiffs  have never been paid. 'What happened was, the attorney abandoned us,' Abrams said,  noting the attorney did not file supplemental paperwork in  support of Abrams's claim on time.   'The way the court set  it up, you couldn't go in and defend yourself.   They make  the decisions on you.   You send your paperwork into the  attorney. ''This case needs to be investigated, to see where the  arbitrators, adjudicators, facilitators, they're all filthy  rich.   All the lawyers, filthy rich, and most of the black  farmers are still poor from 1997 to now,' Abrams said. 'All we want to do is stay on the land.   Write the debt off  [for USDA loans for those farmers still on their land] and  let us stay on the land.   Everyone's prospering off these  black farmers,' Abrams said. 'They did not want to give the land back to the black  farmers.   They had no problem giving [billions of dollars],  as long as they could take the black farmers' land,' Abrams  said. 