For the past six years, French and U. S.  engineers have been installing solar  panels and wind turbines in the southeastern Nicaraguan town of Bluefields,  promoting clean energy and development among the region's Rama indigenous  peoples. In 2004, French engineer Lâl Marandin and the Franco-U. S.  brothers  Guillaume and Mathias Craig founded blueEnergy, a non-governmental  organisation with resources and donations from companies and foundations  in France and the United States. Today, the non-profit entity employs some 20 technicians from the two  countries, as well as from Nicaragua. The Craig brothers spent their childhood in Bluefields, as their mother Colette  Craig, a U. S.  linguist and anthropologist, worked in Nicaragua in the 1980s. Twenty years later, they returned, Mathias as an engineer and Guillaume as an  administrator, to continue their mother's work in cultural conservation,  complemented by environmental development, Anne-Cécile Mailfert, director  of blueEnergy's French affiliate, explained to Tierramérica. In its six years of operations, blueEnergy has installed solar panels and small  wind turbines that produce 12 kilowatts per hour.  The group also distributed  more than 50 filtering systems that provide potable water to 12 communities  -- totalling about 3,000 people. The non-profit entity has provided refrigerators for collective use by fishers  and has overseen the construction and outfitting of small eco-hotels as a way  to foment tourism. These are not just in Bluefields, capital of Nicaragua's South Atlantic  Autonomous Region, but also in more isolated communities, like Monkey  Point, some 50 kilometres to the south and accessible only by boat.  That  village now has electricity from wind turbines, and potable water, thanks to  the filters that run on the new source of electricity. Cultural survival is important to blueEnergy.  The language of the Ramas  comes from a family of languages known as Chibcha from the central zone of  what is now Colombia, and could be a key to understanding pre-Colombian  migrations.  But the language is in danger of extinction -- today very few  people speak it. Tierramérica sat down with Anne-Cécile Mailfert in Paris to discuss some of  these issues. Q: Beyond family ties, what other motivations did the Craig brothers and  Marandin have for working in Bluefields?  A: They knew about the region's economic difficulties and the deficiencies in  electrical infrastructure.  Bluefields is very isolated, practically without  connection to the Nicaraguan electrical matrix.  Furthermore, the currents of  the local rivers are very weak, so hydroelectric generation is not an option. But blueEnergy turned that problem into a virtue, by utilising the sun and the  wind.  Furthermore, we are considering the use of biomass as an additional  energy source.  In this way two objectives are met: providing electricity to a  region in need, and avoiding pollution. Q: But blueEnergy does not just supply clean energy.   A: Another essential goal is to make the instruments of development and of  preservation of culture and language available to the Rama indigenous  peoples.  To do that we are cooperating with the population in educational  programmes and providing equipment, like the refrigerators for the fishers. Our equipment is simple because the idea is for the Ramas to acquire and  develop competence in areas of economic and cultural life that are crucial for  their survival.  Because access to Bluefields is very difficult, it costs a lot to  transport people or equipment there. We have installed potable water systems in several communities, we are  helping to create trade associations among Rama women, we are conducting  economic feasibility studies for microprojects and we are advising the  indigenous peoples on financial matters, such as obtaining microcredits. Clean energy is just one way to foment local economic development and  conservation of the Rama culture. Q: How have Nicaraguan entities reacted to these initiatives?  A: We have cooperation programmes with the government's National  Technological Institute, which supervises the technical and professional  training across the country, and with the National Electrical Industry  Development Fund.  We are also working with the 'eco-oven' project of  Proleña, a non-governmental organisation whose goal is the more efficient,  modern and sustainable use of biomass in the domestic and industrial  sectors, both urban and rural. Q: In the international sphere, who is partnering with blueEnergy?  A: Kiva, a microcredit organisation based in San Francisco (U. S. ) supports the  microcredits office in Bluefields.  We are also working with Good Energies, an  international company that invests in clean energy, with Trojan, which makes  batteries, and with several engineering and electro-technology companies. (*This story was originally published by Latin American newspapers that are  part of the Tierramérica network.  Tierramérica is a specialised news service  produced by IPS with the backing of the United Nations Development  Programme, United Nations Environment Programme and the World Bank. ) 