Contrary to recent media reports of a quick recovery in the  Gulf of Mexico, scientists and biologists are 'deeply  concerned' about impacts that will likely span 'several  decades'. 'My prediction is that we will be dealing with the impacts  of this spill for several decades to come and it will  outlive me,' Dr.  Ed Cake, a biological oceanographer, as  well as a marine and oyster biologist, told IPS, 'I won't be  here to see the recovery. 'Cake's grim assessment stems partially from a comparison he  made to the Exxon Valdez oil disaster and the second largest  oil disaster in the Gulf of Mexico (BP's being the largest),  that of the Ixtoc-1 blowout well in the Bay of Campeche in  1979. 'The impacts of the Exxon Valdez are still being felt 21  years later,' Cake said, 'The impacts of the Ixtoc-1 are  still being felt and known, 31 years later.  I know folks who  study oysters in bays in the Yucatan Peninsula, and oysters  there have still not returned, 31 years later.  So as an  oyster biologist I'm concerned about that.  Those things are  still affected 31 years later, and that was a smaller spill  by comparison. 'He is also concerned about deepwater habitats.  Given that BP  has used at least 1. 9 million gallons of chemically toxic  dispersants, the vast majority of the oil has remained  beneath the surface, and much of that has sunk to the sea  floor.  As an example, he cited 'a new coral colony ecosystem'  within 10 miles of BP's blowout Macondo Well, which was  found by a pipeline company whilst it was producing an  environmental impact assessment statement of the route of  the pipeline.  'They found some amazing coral communities that no one knew  about, and now they will be covered in oil,' Cake said,  'Those will not recover. 'Dr.  Stephen Cofer-Shabica, an oceanographer in South  Carolina, focuses on the biology of barrier islands.  He  monitored the affects of the Ixtoc-1 oil disaster on Padre  Island National Seashore in south Texas. 'You can go back now, 31 years later, and there's still oil  in the sand there [Padre Island],' he told IPS.  But his main  concern is now about what the state of Louisiana is doing in  response to BP's oil disaster. Louisiana's Governor Bobby Jindal has authorised the  dredging and building of sand berms near Louisiana's barrier  islands in an effort to keep oil away from the shore.  One  area where the dredging project is still underway is the  Chandeleur Islands. 'The Chandeleur project is totally futile and a waste of  resources, and I can't believe they are still doing it,' Dr.   Cofer-Shabica said, 'That's what I find totally  unfathomable.  There's oil floating around underwater, that  has been dispersed and these barrier islands, as constructs,  will not have any effect on that oil at all. 'According to Dr.  Cofer-Shabica, the so-called fix is  actually a hugely destructive problem.  'From an  oceanographic perspective, this was biologically  destructive, especially when you start digging up the bottom  in shallow water, and building these barrier islands. 'He added, 'Louisiana is in a precarious position anyway  because of the subsiding that is happening in the delta, and  on top of that you have worldwide sea-level rise, so it has  two physical factors that are working against its marshes.   So building barrier islands to presumably keep oil out,  amidst rising sea levels, makes no sense. 'In addition to this, he said that the biological impacts of  building islands 'are larger than the physical impacts,' and  said this of dredging sediment from those areas: 'You're in  shallow water that is biologically rich with clams, worms,  and bacteria, that will all be dug up and destroyed. 'Dr.  Cake is also worried about oil contaminating the  oysters.  He has seen much oil in Louisiana's marshes.  'One  of the experts with us worked for NOAA on the Exxon Valdez  spill, and he told me if the oil is on the marsh grass, it's  in the oysters. 'BP and the Coast Guard are currently under scrutiny for  having used so much oil dispersant, an industrial solvent  that breaks up the oil so that it will sink below the  surface.  For example, a 1979 report, 'Effects of Corexit 9527 on the  Hatchability of Mallard Eggs' in the Bulletin of  Environmental Contamination and Toxicology, showed that even  though dispersants are applied to minimise oil impacts to  visible and charismatic species, Corexit actually enhances  the lethal effects of crude oil on birds that are exposed.   Corexit 9527 penetrates eggshells and shell membranes as  readily as crude oil.  When applied to an eggshell near the  embryo, the embryo would fuse to the shell membrane and die  within 24 hours. 'Corexit breaks the oil up into micro-globules,' Dr.  Cake  said, 'That's the harmful part for oysters.  Oysters are  filter feeders, and they feed on a range of three to 12  millionths of a meter as particles.  You can grind up  graphite from a pencil in fine enough particles and they'll  run it through their system.  It's the same with the micro- globules of oil.  They'll be taken in, but in going through  the system, and in absorbing some of that oil, it'll cause  lesions.  So it's actually what the Corexit does to the oil  that'll affect the oysters in the end. ' According to Dr.  Cake, his study teams have people watching  and monitoring affected areas.  'In the past month, in Bretton and Chandeleur Sounds, oil  was there during the day, it was sprayed with Corexit at  night, and the next day it was gone.  Where did it go? It  went to the bottom, and that's adjacent to where these  oyster farms are.  So at that point, there's a lot less water  for that Corexit to disperse into, and there may be an  impact from that on the oysters. 'Cake said that while scientists have found very large plumes  of dispersed oil at depth, 'I'm not sure that oil will ever  get here as dispersed clouds.  It's getting here as sunken  clouds, because that's what they [BP] wanted it to do.  Sink  it, get it out of sight out of mind. 'Chasidy Hobbs with Emerald Coastkeeper in Pensacola,  Florida, is on the City of Pensacola Environmental Advisory  Board and Escambia County Citizens Environmental Committee.   Hobbs also directs the environmental litigation research  firm, Geography and Environment. 'We're poisoning the entire Gulf of Mexico food web,' Hobbs,  who is also an instructor and advisor in the Environmental  Studies Department at University of West Florida, told IPS.   'It's crazy, and it's criminal.  I'm deeply concerned with  the long-term ecological and human impact. 'Dr.  Cake is among a large and growing group of scientists  who are discussing a grim future for much of the Gulf of  Mexico as a result of BP's disaster. 'The oil itself on the bottom is being eaten by bacteria.   This has always been the case in naturally occurring seeps  across the Gulf.  But now we've introduced much more oil, and  as the bacteria grow they are consuming the oxygen that is  in that area.  And that oxygen loss will result in  dead/hypoxic zones, like the one off the West side of the  Mississippi over towards Galveston where there's one that is  3,000 square mile area of dead bottom.  Now we're looking at  that along the eastern part because of the presence of so  much more bacteria. '  