Gonaives, the third largest city in Haiti, is rushing to  prepare for an expected highly active hurricane season.  The  city was flooded by three hurricanes in the past six years -  Hannah and Ike in 2008, and Jeanne, which killed at least  2,500 people in 2004. While progress has been made in the recovery from those  disasters, Gonaives - which was largely spared by the Jan.   16 earthquake - remains extremely vulnerable to new  hurricanes.  Reconstruction of parts of the highway crossing the city was  only recently completed.  When this reporter visited Gonaives  last year, the population was upset with the state of the  dusty road, although Estrella, a Dominican construction  company, has since fixed large portions of it.  Some locations that were routinely inundated with filthy  water have been rebuilt.  Last year, it might have taken a  pedestrian almost 10 minutes to traverse the intersection in  front of the Gonaives National Police headquarters after one  hour of rain.  Belmour Myriam, a middle-aged woman, is working on drainage  of the Biennac canal, which channels water from east of  Gonaives to the ocean.  Cleaning the canal has been a five- month project of USAID.   'I live in Baby Street,' she told IPS.  'Six years after the  hurricane, my street is still not cleaned up.  We have  received no aid or attention from either local authorities  or NGOs.  We are alone in Baby Street. ' 'There is little change.  We have power almost twenty-four- seven, and Avenue des Dattes is almost done.  That's all,'  she added.   Traffic on the highway is bustling.  But smaller  neighbourhood streets were destroyed by the flooding.  Many  remain damaged, unpaved and dirty. Ferd Florial, a motorcycle taxi driver, depends on the roads  to make a living.  'Everything is okay, the road  construction, the power, except the road Biennac, which is a  rocky and flooded road.  Now we taxi drivers can breathe  easier because we don't need to change tires and tubes  almost every day,' he said. Access to education is limited for children in Haiti, but in  Gonaives the situation was aggravated by hurricanes. 'There is a crisis in education here in Gonaives,' said  Morancy Milius, a graduate law student working as a teacher.   'The teachers who have been working for many years have not  yet paid.  Other teachers are still waiting for their  nominated letters.  Everything is politics here,' he said.   A Venezuelan flag flies over the local power station, a sign  of the Venezuelan government's investment in the city.   'Thanks to Venezuela, we in Gonaives have no problem for  power,' Milius said.   The scars of the hurricanes are still visible.  Mosquitoes  and other health risks from standing floodwater remain  challenges.  Block after block dirt and debris are piled next  to damaged houses.   'I came after Hannah and Ike, there was a lot of filthy  water here, now it's getting better.  The future of my  business is more promising because of the reconstruction of  the road,' said Sergo Jean Phillipe, a cloth-maker whose  business is on Avenue des Dattes.  Residents of Gonaives are psychologically scarred as well.   More than 3,000 people were killed in as the storms struck  the city one after another. 'People in Gonaives are still traumatised,' Dorcely  Dieumery, a community leader who lives in Detour Laborde,  told IPS.  'Anytime it's going to rain, we have to figure out  where we are going to stay.  We need things go a little bit  faster. ' When Hurricane Jeanne hit Gonaives in 2004, humanitarian  groups and U. N.  peacekeeping troops directed the relief  effort.  The eastern part of the city's monument to Haitian  independence is still occupied by U. N.  soldiers.  Now  camouflaged U. S.  military Humvees roam the city.  The  Department of Defence has stationed the USS Iwo Jima off the  coast, poised to respond to hurricanes. U. N.  agencies like the World Food Programme, as well as the  International Organisation for Migration, the Red Cross and  Red Crescent are also working hard to prepare for the worst,  with food distribution plans that include using a barge  service if the roads are washed out. Gonaivians are hopeful that if disaster strikes again, their  situation will not be as terrible as it was for the past  three hurricanes. 