Thailand and other major rice exporting countries are at risk of losing Africa as  an important trading partner if they raise their rice prices.  Half of the 10 million  tons of rice exported by Thailand last year went to Africa.  Nigeria, Benin, Cote  d’Ivoire and South Africa were among the main buyers of rice in Africa. 'Some Asian governments are considering raising rice prices, mainly in  support of their farmers.  In Thailand for instance, 80 percent of the  population works in agriculture and they therefore form the bulk of the  government’s voters,' says Mozambican-born Miguel Lima, a trading director  working for SeaRice Limited. This Swiss company specialises in exporting rice.  Lima has been working in  the African rice business for the past 25 years.  Earlier this year, the main farmers’ association of Thailand -- after China the  world’s biggest rice producer and exporter -- asked the government to  intervene to increase the price of this crop.  The motivation behind the association’s request was the drop in the price of  rice over the past few months.  Reasons for this include that foreign buyers  postpone purchases in expectation of further price cuts.  African countries purchased 1. 4 million tons of Thai rice over the first five  months of this year, figures by Thailand’s government show.  Over the same  period last year, this amount came close to two million tons.  The decline in  export volume led to a price decrease.  Thai farmers fear that without government intervention the price will drop  further.  'The problem with increasing prices, which came down after they skyrocketed  in 2007 and 2008, is that rice-producing countries are forgetting about their  most important buyers, which are African countries,' Lima argues. 'In general people in Africa simply do not have a lot of money to spend,' he  added.  'I agree that farmers should earn a decent living, but one should not push  the boundaries too far.  African consumers will back off if rice becomes too  expensive.  They will look for other staple foods.  That will destroy the  market. 'According to the Food and Agricultural Organisation (FAO), the average world  prices for rice rose by 217 percent between 2006 and 2008.  In 2008 rice was  80 percent more expensive, compared to 2007.  The price hit a record 1,038  dollars per metric ton in May that year.  Although prices have since come down, uncertainty remains.  One of the problems, Lima noted, is that once someone has changed from  rice to another staple food, like millet or cassava, there is usually no turning  back. This is the case 'not only because changing these patterns takes a lot of  effort, but also because farming and buying grains like millet is a lot cheaper.   If people realise this, they usually will not go back to a more expensive staple  food. 'Moses Adewuyi, director of agro-processing at Nigeria’s ministry of  agriculture and rural development, agrees with Lima’s statements.   'If prices should increase like they did in 2007 and 2008, Nigerian consumers  will switch to other staple foods such as cassava, maize, millet, plantain,  beans, and yam.  'Nigeria, like other African countries, has plenty of staple foods that are a  good substitute for rice if the latter becomes too expensive for the  consumer,' he says. 'Last year, prices came down in my country,' Adewuyi continues.  'Today,  consumers pay approximately 450 dollars per 50kg bag.  In the 2007/2008  financial year, the same bag cost up to 900 dollars.  We cannot have history  repeat itself. 'One of the ways in which Nigeria — an importer of two million tons of rice per  annum, of which the bulk comes from Thailand -- wants to gear itself  against new price hikes is to develop the local rice industry. Adewuyi told IPS: 'We, the government, are planning to increase production  so that we are less dependent on the Far East in case Thai rice becomes too  expensive. ' Nigeria is Africa’s largest consumer of rice as well as the continent’s main  grower of the crop.  'We produce 2. 1 millions tons of milled or white rice a year and 4. 2 million  tons of paddy or unprocessed rice that has not been milled,' Adewuyi  explains.  'We want to increase our output and the quality of our processing plants.  I  think other governments of African rice-growing countries should do the  same. 'Duong Phuong Thao, trade officer at Vietnam’s department of export and  import, defends the call of Asian farmers for government intervention when  it comes to the rice price.  Vietnam produces 24. 3 million tons of rice per annum, of which  approximately eight million tons is exported.  About 30 percent of these  exports go to Africa.   'Vietnamese farmers currently sell their rice below the cost price, and that is  not sustainable for them.  We need to think about our farmers too. ' 