Dusk creeps over Konweva like a black shroud slowly draping  over the village.  The edges of its paddy fields, where the  agricultural plains meet the surrounding thick shrubs, are  first to be blanketed in the darkness.  Already, there are  signs that the night will not be peaceful.    Villagers in Konweva, located in north-western Kurunegala  district some 150 kilometres from the Sri Lankan capital  Colombo, eye one another anxiously as loud booms are heard  across the fields.  'They have begun to move,' Immihami  Mudiyanse, a farmer, warns in hushed tones.     From the edge of an abandoned paddy field, we keep a  watchful eye out for them — marauding elephants that have  been wandering from their jungle habitat and wreaking havoc  in the village.    Suddenly, Shanika Ekenayaka, one among the group keeping  vigil that night, gestures urgently toward a spot in the  horizon where the field ends and the jungle begins.  A large  shadow emerges nonchalantly from the shrubs and lumbers  leisurely across the deserted field — oblivious to the loud  firecrackers that go off intermittently, somewhere over the  ridge of the jungle.  A group of us squats just 500 metres  away — the beast knows we are there, but does not care.     In stark contrast, we are visibly more nervous.   Mesmerised by the magnificent figure in front of us, our  heads twitch toward the jungle to our left every 10 seconds  or so, cautious not to be caught off-guard by other  rampaging elephants that could be heading straight toward  us.  'That wouldn’t be very good, would it?' Ekenayaka asks,  rhetorically.     After 20 gut-wrenching minutes, the animal completes its  amble across the field, and disappears as it appeared —  merging into the darkness behind a dirt road.  'Tonight there  will be no sleep,' Mudiyanse says, as he heads back to his  paddy fields to keep a night of vigil.     The hide-and-seek battle between the villagers and the  elephants here is a common, but deadly, ritual.  And Konweva  is but one location where this deadly game is being played  out.    According to government official Archchilage Weerasinghe,  some 283 hectares of land have been cultivated in the  Konweva area for paddy.  But the elephants have impeded  further development.  'We don’t plant in an area of about 350  acres (142 hectares) because of elephants,' Weerasinghe  says.    The elephants cross the paddy fields at will and trample  the crops, villagers complain.  Weerasinghe gave IPS a tour  of some agricultural areas where the animals had roamed the  week before.  From a distance, it looked like the aftermath  of a meteorite storm.  The elephants have also destroyed  hundreds of coconut trees lining the village, he explains.    It does not help that villagers are not entitled to  compensation for damages to crops caused by the elephants if  their fields are on government-owned land, which locals  often use without permits.    In short, residents here say, elephants are far from the  adorable creatures seen on television.     In July, a villager was trampled to death, and his wife  injured, in an elephant attack.  According to Weerasinghe, at  least three villagers have been killed by elephants in the  past year.  In Sri Lanka, some 228 elephants and 50 humans  were killed in human-elephant confrontations in 2009, say  government reports.    'The government gives us crackers to light when they  come, but they are of no use,' Weerasinghe laments.  Each  farmer receives four firecrackers a month, 'not enough, not  enough for even a day,' he says.    Some experts, like Jayantha Jayewardene of the Asian  Elephant Specialist Group, believe the elephants might have  wandered into villages here because they prefer secondary- growth forests, or those in the process of re-growth after  having been used for agriculture or logging.     The abundance of food in villages like Konweva, where  paddy harvests can remain stored inside residents’ homes for  months, also provides incentive for the elephants to venture  into these homes.     In fact, the elephants have shown a penchant for paddy  that is at a particular age, 'not young, but not mature  enough for harvest,' says Deepani Kumudini, a Konweva  resident.  To keep the roaming herds from pillaging their  produce, farmers are forced to harvest crops before they  reach maturity.     Jayewardene suggests a possible solution: building  electric fences to keep the animals out — a method that is  used extensively here in Sri Lanka.  But there could be far- reaching consequences.  'One thing to bear in mind is that  fencing can confine elephants to a small area and lead to  starvation among the animals, especially when food is scarce  during times like drought,' Jayewardene explains.    While experts encourage farmers to be more vigilant in  watching over their crops, villagers argue that the extra  effort results in excruciatingly low returns on investment  from paddy cultivation.     In one case, 14 guards had to be employed on elephant  watch, stationed in seven huts erected around a 1. 6-hectare  paddy field.  'The labour cost, the time all put together,  this is not worth it,' says Weerasinghe.  To add to the  farmers’ woes, paddy prices have fallen recently.     The villagers are adamant that the elephants are not  native to the area: they were not seen here until some 20  years ago, they say.  Some believe the first elephants were  sighted in Konweva in March 1992 after the herds were forced  to flee jungles in the north-east when Sri Lanka’s ethnic  conflict erupted into an all-out war.    Wherever the elephants came from, villagers want them out  — but that is unlikely to happen.  For now, there is no  solution in sight to make peace between human and beast, so  the nightly ritual of elephant patrols by Konweva villagers  continues. * This story is part of a series of features on biodiversity  by IPS, CGIAR/Bioversity International, IFEJ and UNEP/CBD,  members of Communicators for Sustainable Development  (http://www. complusalliance. org).  