Little hope has emerged from a meeting here of any binding international  regulations to reduce greenhouse gases at the next UN conference on climate  change scheduled for November and December in Cancun, Mexico. Delegates from around the world met in Bonn Aug.  2-6 within the framework  of the UN convention on climate change (UNFCCC), the international body  coordinating negotiations ahead of the Cancun meeting. The Bonn meeting was the last but one major international meeting before the  UN conference in Cancun.  Another round of negotiations will take place in  Taijin, China, in October.  After the Bonn meeting, that will mean only five  days of official negotiations before the Cancun conference. 'We have to be realistic and not expect too much either from these debates or  from the conference in Cancun,' Jo Leinen, chairperson of the environmental  committee at the European Parliament, told IPS.  'Cancun will only be another step towards yet another UN conference, in  South Africa, in 2011,' Leinen pointed out. The crucial point on the agenda at the UNFCCC meeting was a workshop 'on  the scale of (greenhouse gases) emission reductions to be achieved by Annex  I Parties in aggregate and the contribution of Annex I Parties, individually or  jointly, to this scale. ' Annex I parties refer to the Kyoto protocol description of the 35 most  industrialised countries of the world, that should ratify the agreement and  commit to reduce their emission levels of greenhouse gasses to targets set  mostly below1990 levels. Strong industrialising developing countries with growing emissions of  greenhouse gases, such as China and India, are not part of Annex 1, and  therefore not required to reduce their emissions.  The biggest emitter of  greenhouse gases per capita included in Annex I, the U. S. , did not ratify the  protocol. The Kyoto protocol's present regime on reducing emissions ends in 2012.  The  UN conference in Cancun is supposed to deliver the new regulatory regime  after 2012. But instead of advancing towards an agreement on reducing emissions, 'the  mitigation discussion (in Bonn) even went backwards and became more  polarised,' says Gordon Shepherd from World Wildlife Fund (WWF). The Alliance of Small Island States, which are at risk of getting submerged by  a rise in ocean level due to climate change, accused industrialised countries of  backing away from their emissions cut pledges. 'We cannot anticipate any major shift from what we had in Copenhagen, which  was a 12 to 18 percent reduction when the Intergovernmental Panel on  Climate Change called for 25 percent,' said Dessima Williams, the group's  chairperson. Ottmar Edenhofer, leading German environmental economist and co-author  of the next report by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, says  the present state of international negotiations and policy debates does not  allow for optimism. 'The very fact that the summit of the Group of 20 last June in Toronto did not  mention climate change at all says everything on the present state of the  global environmental policy debates,' Edenhofer told IPS. Edenhofer pointed out that China and the U. S. , the two largest emitters of  greenhouse gases, are not ready to ratify any international binding agreement  on reductions.  'But also Europe has not shown so far that it can decouple  economic growth from greenhouse gases emissions,' Edenhofer said. But he said the Chinese government, despite its reluctance to commit to a  binding agreement, 'has launched a very ambitious programme to reduce the  carbon intensity of its economy, by up to 50 percent by 2020, compared to  2005. 'If China is serious about this target, it would boost future international  negotiations,' Edenhofer said.  By fulfilling this target, China would enhance  its own future chances to ratify an international agreement. Most experts agree that the failure of the UN conference on climate change in  Copenhagen last December to reach a consensus marked a watershed in  international negotiations on the issue. 'One of the major failures of Copenhagen was its incapacity to provide a  signal to the industry that the global dumping space for greenhouse gases is  getting smaller by the day,' Edenhofer said.  'The signal that Copenhagen sent  was that the largest emitters either are not willing or do not know how to face  this challenge. 'The Copenhagen failure and the likely fiasco at Cancun are leading  environmental experts to reconsider the strategy to fight climate change  pursued so far. Oliver Geden, energy expert at the Berlin-based German Institute for  International and Security Affairs, says pressure to progress in climate change  negotiations is growing, because 'the greenhouse gases already emitted are  very likely to provoke a rise of the average global temperature of 1. 5 Celsius  degrees compared to the pre-industrialised era. 'There is broad consensus that rise in the average global temperatures should  remain under two degrees Celsius, in order to avoid the worst of  environmental catastrophes. 'According to the UN Environmental Programme, the peak in emissions shall  be reached as late as 2021,' says Geden.  'But as of today, there is no  evidence whatsoever that a reversal in the trend of emissions can be possible  in the near future. 'That would mean that the two degrees target won't be met.  'But we cannot  afford to appear arbitrary or accommodating in the face of our failures.  So  instead of raising the temperature target, maybe we should change the  parameter -- it is not the average rise of temperatures, but the global  emissions that we should limit.  Maybe we should concentrate on keeping  emissions under 500 parts per million of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere. ' Jo Leinen believes a new failure in the coming conference in Cancun, Mexico,  and in South Africa next year, should lead to 'a Plan B, to get out of the UN  framework, and consider a coalition of the willing to formulate and ratify an  agreement on reducing the emissions. 'Leinen said such a 'coalition of the willing would only make sense if it  encompasses the emitters of at least 80 percent of the greenhouse gases.  As  of today, with only a few negotiation days before Cancun, very few are ready  to talk openly about such an alternative,' he said.  The new chairperson of the UNFCCC, Christiana Figueres, suggested  prolonging the validity of the Kyoto Protocol beyond 2012.   