Luis Miguel, a soft-spoken and serious 21-year-old from  Haiti's Artibonnite Valley, stands on a ridge overlooking the  small farm in the Dominican Cibao where he works as the  owner's overseer.  He adopted his Dominican moniker in order to  fit in. He is on his way back home to the tin shack he shares with  his brother.  He brings the evening's supper: 'pico y pala'  (chicken necks and claws) along with a bit of rice and  cooking oil.  The shack measures no more than 12 or 15 feet  in either direction. He rarely leaves the farm, except to buy provisions at the  local colmados in this small town just south of Bonao.  He  supervises the work crew and sticks close to the farm in  order to guard against theft. 'I have got eight workers under me,' says Luis, 'four of  them women.  They are all Haitians. ' And that is the norm  these days for most small farms. 'I earn 3500 pesos bimonthly,' he says with satisfaction.   That amounts to about 195 dollars a month.  If you consider  that his job is never done, then on a daily basis he earns  no more than six or seven dollars. The price of a typical meal of chicken, rice and beans at a  'comedor' or luncheonette is around 100 pesos, or about  three dollars.  That is half a day's wage, so Luis doesn't  eat out. He is shackled to that shack in more ways than one. Don Jorge, who owns the farm, grows Chinese eggplant and  'vainita', a string bean that grows to a couple feet in  length.  He is doing better these days as a result of free  trade agreements like DR-CAFTA.  'I have cut out the middle man,' he argues.  'I can sell  direct to the market and make a little extra money as a  result.  Plus my product can now be sold overseas.  Better  prices, more money. 'Nonetheless, like any small-scale farmer, he endures tight  constraints on his earnings and is forced to offer low wages  to unskilled labour.  Agriculture has customarily absorbed the excess Haitian  labour spilling over from the sugar plantations, ever since  that industry has diminished its output.  But after the  earthquake, the number of Haitians has spiked, and there is  no crop that doesn't depend on these workers. So much so that any threat to this vulnerable population  also threatens the Dominican economy.  In 2006, Dominicans burned Haitian shanties around Hatillo  Palma in Montecristi province, in reprisal for the murder of  a Dominican couple.  The Dominican army deported hundreds,  and the violence drove thousands more away.  The banana  growers were stripped of their workforce and the harvest  suffered. But aside from such upheavals, agriculturalists confront  significant challenges.  The coffee industry currently  suffers governmental neglect, rising production costs, and  deficient financing and technology.  The plantations are located in mountainous regions that lack  electricity, aqueducts, good roads and social services.   Coffee growers must depend on cheap labour, but this creates  problems as well. The low pay fails to attract Dominicans, who have been  replaced by migrant Haitians.  They are untrained,  undiscriminating (picking green along with ripe berries in  order to fill their baskets more quickly), and  uncomprehending, since many do not speak Spanish, according  to their Dominican overseers. The heavy presence of Haitians in the agricultural workforce  is a natural extension of the fact that this population  traditionally worked the 'zafra', or sugar harvest.  The  sugar companies recruited, transported and deported this  force as it suited their needs. Head north from the capital on the Duarte Highway, and once  descended from the heights of Pedro Brand you discover a  stretch of fragrant orange groves riding the skirts of  dramatic mountains.  The roadside is also dotted with the  usual brightly coloured, tin-roofed shacks that are a stock  feature of generic Dominican painting.  But if you look carefully to the right at certain spots you  will spy a different kind of housing, small barracks, the  remnants of another agricultural economy which prevailed  here in the past century. These were once sugar cane fields.  The small communities  that cling to its fringes are called 'bateys', worker  settlements notorious for their misery and neglect.  The  current generation does not cut cane, they work the orange  groves.  But their social ostracism has not altered much. Michel arrived from Haiti in the latter half of the past  century and now lives in Batey KM43.  He and his children and  grandchildren occupy a small wooden house that barely  contains all the members and their effusive spirits.  What challenges them is social and political legitimacy.  While Michel has lived here long enough to preside over two  subsequent generations of offspring, he has no cedula, the  wallet-sized card that every Dominican citizen must carry to  certify his or her citizenship.  Without it, one technically  cannot procure basic services, and one's political rights  are in jeopardy. Though the Dominican government has been widely praised for  its response to the Haitian earthquake, it has not been as  charitable toward its long-term resident population of  Haitian migrant workers.  It has instead pursued a policy of  exclusion. This policy depends for its justification on the  constitution's controversial definition of citizenship,  which would deny this privilege to anyone born of  'foreigners who are in transit or reside illegally in  Dominican territory. . . 'The irony that Michel can be defined as a foreigner in  transit despite having been legally hired by the mill and  rooted to this spot for decades is entirely lost on the  civil authorities who adjudicate such matters in the  dilapidated governmental offices in nearby Altagracia. 'I have the card that the mill gave me,' he says, holding up  a tattered and faded bit of paper that ratifies his work  status.  'But this don't do me any good. ' If anything, it  works against him. Just his name is enough to cause them to reject his  application.  They write 'Haitian' on a slip of paper and  toss the folder in the backroom among mountains of  disorganised files where it will never be found. Because Michel is considered an 'illegal', his whole family  has had to struggle to acquire legal documentation.  His  grandson, Michel Jr. , despite having won an award in a rap  competition in Higuey, cannot get work as a performer or  even enter any of the resorts for lack of a cedula. You reap what you sow.  But for those who are denied the  fruits of their labour, there is only the sweat and pain of  Adam's curse. 