A wind turbine on an acre of northern Iowa farmland could  generate 300,000 dollars worth of greenhouse-gas-free  electricity a year.  Instead, the U. S.  government pays out  billions of dollars to subsidise grain for ethanol fuel that  has little if any impact on global warming, according to  Lester Brown. 'The smartest thing the U. S.  could do is phase out ethanol  subsidies,' says Brown, the founder of the Washington-based  Earth Policy Institute, in reference to rising food prices  resulting from the unprecedented heat wave in western Russia  that has decimated crops and killed at least 15,000 people. 'The lesson here is that we must take climate change far  more seriously, make major cuts in emissions and fast before  climate change is out of control,' Brown, one of the world's  leading experts on agriculture and food, told IPS. Average temperatures during the month of July were eight  degrees Celsius above normal in Moscow, he said, noting that  'such a huge increase in temperature over an entire month is  just unheard of. 'On Monday, Moscow reached 37 C when the normal temperature  for August is 21 C.  It was the 28th day in a row that  temperatures exceeded 30 C. Soil moisture has fallen to levels seen only once in 500  years, says Brown.  Wheat and other grain yields are expected  to decline by 40 percent or more in Russia, Kazakhstan, and  Ukraine - regions that provide 25 percent of the world's  wheat exports.  Russian Prime Minister Vladimir Putin  announced a few days ago that Russia would ban all grain  exports. Food prices will rise but how much is not known at this  point, says Brown.  'What we do know, however, is that the  prices of wheat, corn, and soybeans are actually somewhat  higher in early August 2010 than they were in early August  2007, when the record-breaking 2007-08 run-up in grain  prices began. 'Emissions of greenhouse gases like CO2 from burning fossil  fuels trap more of the sun's energy.  Climate experts  expected the number and intensity of heat waves and droughts  to increase as a result.  In 2009, heat and fire killed  hundreds in Australia during the worst drought in more than  century, which devastated the country's agriculture sector.   In 2003, a European heat wave killed 53,000 people but as it  occurred late in the summer crop, yields were not badly  affected. If a heat wave like Russia's were centred around the grain- producing regions near Chicago or Beijing, the impacts could  be many times worse because each of these regions produce  five times the amount of grain as Russia does, says Brown.   Such an event could result in the loss of 100 to 200 million  tonnes of grain with unimaginable affects on the world's  food supply. 'Russia's heat wave is a wake-up call to the world regarding  the vulnerability of the global food supply,' he said. The global climate is warming and most food crops are both  heat and drought sensitive.  Rice yields have already fallen  by 10-20 percent over the last 25 years in parts of  Thailand, Vietnam, India and China due to global warming,  new research has shown.  Data from 227 fully-irrigated farms  that grow 'green revolution' crops are suffering significant  yield declines due to warming temperatures at night,  researchers found. 'As nights get hotter, rice yields drop,' reported Jarrod  Welch of the University of California at San Diego and  colleagues in the Proceedings of the National Academy of  Sciences (PNAS) Aug.  9.  Previous studies have shown this  result in experimental plots, but this is the first under  widespread, real-world conditions. With such pressures on the world's food supply it is simply  wrong-headed to use 25 percent of U. S.  grain for ethanol as  a fuel for cars, said Brown. 'Ethanol subsidies must be phased out and real cuts in  carbon emissions made and urgently,' he said. 