With an estimated 14 to 16 million people affected by what the  Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA)  calls 'the worst monsoon-related floods in living memory', the  U. N.  launched a humanitarian flash appeal Wednesday seeking  459. 7 million dollars for relief efforts in Pakistan. 'The disaster is continually getting worse,' said John  Holmes, U. N.  under-secretary-general for humanitarian  affairs and emergency relief coordinator. Speaking to reporters at the appeal's launch, he noted that  the number of people affected by the floods, which began  nearly three weeks ago on Jul.  22, surpasses that of the  2004 Indian Ocean tsunami, the 2005 Pakistan earthquake and  the January Haiti earthquake. 'The scale of the disaster is huge, the needs of the people  affected by it are huge.  That's why we've appealed for 460  million dollars this morning to try to deal with the  consequences of this disaster just for the immediate relief  period,' Holmes said. Pakistan's Permanent Representative to the U. N. , Abdullah  Hussain Haroon, was also present at the launch, and stressed  the severity of the disaster, noting that the impact of the  floods is expected to lower Pakistan's projected GDP for  this year from four percent to one and a half percent. 'Six thousand villages have been wiped off the face of the  earth,' Haroon said.  'You can't get from one area to another  — there's no connection.  The phones are down.  The roads have  blown away.  It's like going back to primordial history. ' He added that the floods had consumed 150,000 kilometres of  land, with the number of casualties, estimated by OCHA to be  at 1,200, difficult to approximate given the displacement of  masses of people as a result of the floods. Martin Nesirky, spokesperson for the secretary-general Ban  Ki-moon, told reporters in a briefing today that 560,000  people still need emergency shelter and 2. 7 million children  still need urgent, life-saving care.  And in Khyber  Pakhtunkhwa alone — the province hardest-hit by the floods —  2. 6 million people remain in need of food assistance.  'I have met people in Swat who have walked for days just to  get food for their families to eat,' said Humanitarian  Director of Oxfam Jane Cocking, who is visiting flood- affected people in the country.  'This is a race against  time,' she added. The nearly half-billion dollar flash appeal is for the  coming 30- to 60-day period.  Holmes said that it would be  updated at the one-month mark and would likely increase.  'With cholera — God forbid, if these things spread, you're  talking about much higher sums of money,' Haroon noted. Martin Mogwanja, U. N.  Humanitarian Coordinator for Pakistan  told IPS that aid needed for long-term rebuilding efforts  could exceed one billion dollars. 'There's going to be a tremendous cost in terms of repairing  roads, bridges, telecommunications and electricity  infrastructure and, most importantly, repairing irrigation  infrastructure that ensures the capacity of the rural  farmers of Pakistan to continue to produce the foodstuffs  and cash crops that sustain them,' Mogwanja told IPS. Prior to today's flash appeal, Holmes said that the  international community had pledged 150 to 160 million  dollars.  'We're confident those figures will rise rapidly,'  he added. According to OCHA's most recent figures released today, the  U. S.  has pledged 62. 2 million dollars, the U. K.  has  committed 32. 6 million dollars, Australia has committed 9  million dollars, Kuwait has committed 5 million dollars and  Japan has committed 3. 5 million dollars.  These comprise the  top five largest pledges by U. N.  member states, with private  assistance exceeding 9 million dollars. With the flood-related destruction of roads and bridges  throughout the country, physical access remains the greatest  challenge in the relief effort.  Holmes noted the difficulty in access to areas controlled by  insurgent forces even prior to the onset of this disaster.  'From our point of view, our immediate concern is giving  people aid when they need it,' he said.  'The politics of it  cannot be the concern of the U. N.  or humanitarian agencies. 'Meanwhile, another full week of rains is predicted.  'It's  still going on — we don't know how far this is going to go,'  Haroon said. 