Small-scale importers of used cars in Malawi are crying foul over a government  decision to introduce higher duties on second-hand passenger vehicles aged  eight years and older. In recent years, Malawi has seen an influx of used cars, mostly imported from  Japan.  The vehicles are sold at low prices, some as cheap as 2,500 dollars  apiece. Used car dealer Amanda Kwada explained to IPS the route that the car  imports follow into Malawi: from Japan, the vehicles are brought in via Durban  in South Africa or Dar es Salaam in Tanzania. Kwada employs three people to manage different parts of the business.  A  driver collects the vehicles at either one of the ports and brings them to  Lilongwe, Malawi’s capital.  Kwada displays the vehicles on the roadside to attract potential customers.   She has a guard overseeing the vehicles and a sales person who seeks out  new customers. Car vendors such as Kwada are up in arms over the new tax measures,  announced in May 2010, which they say will destroy their businesses or  resulting in much higher prices. Kwada has been importing second-hand cars from Japan for the past four  years but now fears that her business will be destroyed, following the  decision by government.  She worries that the new duties are too high for her business to show a profit  and that she may have to abandon the trade.  The people she employs will  lose their livelihoods. Kwada (42) supports an extended family with the profits she makes: 'I am not  sure if I could continue doing that now that the business is becoming  complicated. 'Some customers of second-hand car dealers are also opposed to the  measures.  Patricia Kalilombe (23) works as a secretary at a company in  Lilongwe.  She told IPS that she was able to afford a car using savings from  her salary. 'I only paid about 4,000 dollars for the vehicle because it was second-hand.  I  never dreamt I would own a car at this age.  The decision by government to  increase taxes on old cars will be an impediment for all the people who do  not have much money but still want to own a vehicle,' said Kalilombe.  Malawian finance minister Ken Kandodo explained the reasons behind the  new tax regime by referring to the declaration of the United Nations Climate  Change Conference in December 2009.  The conference, he said during his  budget statement in May 2010, called for countries to take action against  climate change.  'Government is committed to taking bold steps towards the reduction of  pollution in the environment and avoid dumping, particularly of motor  vehicles,' Kandodo told the Malawian parliament.  The new duties are as follows: an additional 20 percent duty will be charged  on passenger vehicles aged between eight and 12 years, while those older  than 12 years would attract an additional 50 percent duty.  Regarding passenger vehicles aged up to eight years, current rates of duties  would continue to apply.   Goods vehicles exceeding 10 tons and that are older than 15 years would  attract a 20 percent duty.  There was no duty on such vehicles until this  announcement. Car vendors started fighting the tax measure even before the national budget  was passed.  They staged a protest march to the national assembly building  where they presented a petition against the budget.  But the demonstration did not deter parliamentarians from endorsing the  new tax measures and they proceeded to pass the budget. The dealers continued the fight in court on Jun 16 by obtaining an injunction  stopping the Malawi Revenue Authority, a government agency responsible for  the collection of tax revenues, from enforcing the new duties. The car traders have since asked the court to carry out a judicial review of the  taxes.  The vendors are describing the new tax as 'draconian' and claim it will  kill small-scale dealers who depend on vehicle sales for their livelihood. The car traders have the backing of the Consumers Association of Malawi  (CAMA), an influential nongovernmental organisation that promotes  consumer rights.  CAMA executive director John Kapito told the local media that taxes should  be formulated to contribute to national development, and not as  'punishment'. The Indigenous Business Association of Malawi (IBAM) — a grouping of local  traders — added that the new tax measures are contrary to government efforts  to promoting local entrepreneurship in the country. Meanwhile, the vendors wait for the court to rescue them from the new tax  measures.  