BP says it is no longer using toxic dispersants to break up  the Gulf of Mexico oil spill.  Gulf Coast residents claim  otherwise, and say they have the sicknesses to prove it. On Aug.  5, Donny Mastler, a commercial fisherman who also  works on boats, was at the Dauphin Island Marina.  'I was with my friend Albert, and we were both slammed with  exposure,' Mastler, told IPS, referring to toxic chemicals  he inhaled that he believes are associated with BP's Corexit  dispersants.  'We both saw the clumps of white bubbles on the  surface that we know come from the dispersed oil. 'Both of their eyes were watering and their throats were  burning, so Albert went to sit in his air-conditioned truck,  while Mastler headed home. 'I started to vomit brown, and my pee was brown also,'  Mastler said.  'I kept that up all day.  Then I had a night of  sweating and non-stop diarrhea unlike anything I've ever  experienced. ' BP has been using two oil dispersants, Corexit 9500 and  Corexit 9527, both of which are banned in Britain.  More than  1. 9 million gallons of dispersant has been used to date on  the Gulf of Mexico oil disaster. Pathways of exposure are inhalation, ingestion, skin, and  eye contact.  Health impacts include headaches, nausea,  vomiting, diarrhea, abdominal pains, dizziness, chest pains  and tightness, irritation of eyes, nose, throat and lungs,  difficulty breathing, respiratory system damage, skin  irrigation and sensitisation, hypertension, central nervous  system depression, neurotoxic effects, genetic damage and  mutations, cardiac arrhythmia, and cardiovascular damage,  among several others. Not along ago, at the same marina, WKRG News 5 took a water  sample to test for dispersants.  The sample literally  exploded when it was mixed with an organic solvent  separating the oil from the water.  Bob Naman, the chemist who analysed the sample, told the  station, 'We think that it most likely happened due to the  presence of either methanol or methane gas or the presence  of the dispersant Corexit. 'As for Mastler's physical reaction to his exposure, Hugh  Kaufman, an EPA whistleblower and analyst, has reported this  of the effects of the toxic dispersants: 'We have dolphins that are hemorrhaging.  People who work  near it are hemorrhaging internally.  And that's what  dispersants are supposed to do…And, for example, in the  Exxon Valdez case, people who worked with dispersants, most  of them are dead now.  The average death age is around 50.   It's very dangerous, and it's an… economic protector of BP,  not an environmental protector of the public. 'By early July, the Alabama Department of Public Health said  that 56 people in Mobile and Baldwin Counties had sought  treatment for what they believed were oil disaster-related  illnesses.  Mastler had a previous exposure when he was working on a  boat for a BP contractor and brought aboard an oil-covered  absorbent pad he found in the water.  That exposure, too,  found Mastler with rashes on his arms, a soar throat, and  nausea.  He told IPS he knows many island residents who stay  inside to avoid toxic fumes that blow in from the Gulf. BP claims to have conducted air monitoring of oil-effected  areas.  A written statement by the company says, 'The  monitoring data shows that few people, if any, are exposed  to levels of oil or dispersants that have even the potential  to cause any significant adverse health effects. 'Many scientists and doctors disagree. 'The dispersants used in BP's draconian experiment contain  solvents such as petroleum distillates and 2-butoxyethanol,'  Dr.  Riki Ott, toxicologist and marine biologist, told IPS. 'Solvents dissolve oil, grease, and rubber.  Spill responders  have told me that the hard rubber impellors in their engines  and the soft rubber bushings on their outboard motor pumps  are falling apart and need frequent replacement…Divers have  told me that they have had to replace the soft rubber o- rings on their gear after dives in the Gulf and that the  oil-chemical stew eats its way into even the Hazmat dive  suits,' Ott said. 'Given this evidence, it should be no surprise that solvents  are also notoriously toxic to people, something the medical  community has long known,' Dr.  Ott added.  'In 'Generations  at Risk', medical doctor Ted Schettler and others warn that  solvents can rapidly enter the human body: They evaporate in  air and are easily inhaled, they penetrate skin easily, and  they cross the placenta into fetuses.  For example, 2- butoxyethanol is a human health hazard substance: It is a  fetal toxin and it breaks down blood cells, causing blood  and kidney disorders. 'Even the federal government has taken precautions for its  employees.  U. S.  military officials decided to reroute  training flights in the Gulf region in order to avoid oil  and dispersant tainted-areas.  Public health agencies operating in the region have told  their researchers who test the air quality to wear  respirators when they are offshore, and in preparation for a  long-term study of health effects from the BP disaster, the  U. S.  Labour Department has started gathering data from  thousands of workers. Meanwhile, physical evidence around the Gulf continues to  mount daily.  Ongoing reports of fish kills and wildlife  deaths are a daily occurrence now.  On Aug.  5, in Port St.  Joe, Florida, city officials closed a  public boat ramp following an unexplained fish kill in St.   Joseph's Bay that caused hundreds of dead fish and crabs to  wash ashore.  Witnesses sighted a brown, sludgy material  roughly six miles offshore. 'My voice is gone,' Mastler, speaking to IPS with a gravelly  voice.  'Another time I was at the marina and got exposed  again, I could smell the oil.  I've got a lot of burning in  my mouth right now. ' On Aug.  8 he said that his urine was still 'brown', but said  he was starting to feel 'a little better'.  Given that  Mastler already had a chronic obstructive pulmonary disease,  he believes he is 'like the canary in the coal mine' with  dispersant exposure. Over the last six weeks, IPS has spoken with several people  along the Gulf Coast who have complained of skin rashes,  respiratory problems, nausea, headaches, burning eyes, and  other problems they believe to be associated with BP's toxic  dispersants. Mastler told IPS he chose not to work for BP because he  never trusted them. 'That's why I never went to BP, and I'm not going to, and I  don't appreciate the people they let die over this, and how  they're making us sick, and we've already had some deaths  around this island,' he added, 'They put untrained people  out on the water, with faulty equipment, and with faulty  respirators. 'On Wednesday, Mastler was still suffering. 'I'm still feeling terrible.  I'm about to go to the doctor  again right now.  I might end up in the hospital.  I'm short  of breath, the diarrhea has been real bad, I still have  discolouration in my urine, and the day before yesterday I  was coughing up white foam with brown spots in it. ' Mastler plans to file a claim against BP for his medical  expenses. 