When architect Hikari Kurihara built his quaint house five  years ago, he hoped to spread a new message of conservation —  by revisiting the past.    'I was keen to prod the comfortable Japanese to realise  that their affluent lives were ignoring our rich tradition  of appreciating nature.  The best way to send this message  was through their homes,' Kurihara explained.    Kurihara, 62, was inspired by architecture during the Edo  period — the former name of Japanese capital Tokyo from the  12th to the 19th century, famous for its vibrant urban  culture.  Thus, he constructed his own Edo-styled home, a  narrow three-storey house spanning some 90 square metres.    Besides following traditional Japanese wood and paper  design elements, Kurihara’s masterpiece showcases a major  component of Edo homes in the past — a system for conserving  water.    To combat Japan’s scorching, humid summers, efficient  water usage was an integral part of Edo culture and the  urban landscape was sprinkled with wood and traditional  paper structures.     With summer temperatures soaring in recent years,  Kurihara’s return to Edo-styled houses is a breezy idea.   Infusing new technology with Edo concepts, Kurihara has  devised a rainwater recycling system for the house.     Rainwater is stored in a two-tonne tank, and used for  bathing, the flushing of two toilets, and the watering of  another ingenious natural device, a 'green curtain'— a wall  of leafy bitter-gourd vines along the west side of the  house, designed to keep the heat out even during the hottest  times of the day.    To bring to life his message of conservation and the  basic Edo values — enjoying nature and practicing  environmental harmony — enormous care is taken on the use of  natural materials.     'I am hoping my home conveys the message that a beautiful  home is an enjoyable way of relearning the old values,'  Kurihara explained.    Indeed, walking into Kurihara’s Edo-styled home is quite  an experience.  To usher in natural light, as well as provide  aesthetic stimulation, Japanese pine wood adorns the ceiling  and floor; windows and sliding doors are crafted from paper,  and a tiny interior rock garden is situated in the bathroom.    The best time is in the summer, Kurihara says, when he  sits on his sofa and listens to drops of rainwater dribbling  on his roof — a process that begins after he presses a  button to release the stored water above, through several  attached valves.  Besides its cooling effect, the dance of  rainwater on the roof creates a sound reminiscent of  traditional Edo summer wind chimes.    Even before Kurihara built his house, resident Yoko  Kobayashi was so impressed with just the idea of revisiting  Japanese traditions as an ecological measure that she  decided to build one for herself.    'My home was constructed with the help of Kurihara.  I  water my garden, wash the car and use the bath and toilets  with recycled rainwater,' Kobayashi said.    Government bodies here have also started down this  conservation trail.  In Sumida, a ward located east of Tokyo,  officials actively urge residents to preserve rainwater, and  provide a subsidy for the building of rainwater storage  tanks.    Environmental officer Katsuno Kawano says 24 public  structures, such as the ward office building and gymnasiums,  have already been equipped with rainwater storage tanks.   Recycled rainwater accounts for some 20 percent of more than  13,600 tonnes of water used in Sumida ward each year.    The drive to push the recycling of rainwater, explains  Kawano, helps meet a crucial environmental goal, as well as  creates public awareness for another long-term goal —  building a society that cares for the environment.    'It’s not as if we are saving huge amounts of water by  collecting rainwater,' Kawano says.  'But I think we are  reaching a more important goal, which is to instill in  people that saving (water) is important. '   It is impossible to depend on recycled rainwater as the  only source of water, says Kurihara, who reports that his  water-recycling system at home has not resulted in  significantly reduced water bills.    But Kurihara insists that revisiting forgotten Japanese  traditions is the way to go.     Environmentalists say Japan is facing a 'heat island'  syndrome, with soaring temperatures linked to the rapid  construction of skyscrapers that trap the sun’s rays, spew  out more hot air, and shut out the sea breeze.    Japan’s green activists and local municipalities this  year resorted to throwing large amounts of water onto Tokyo  streets in the evening — a popular Edo cooling practice — to  combat the sweltering summer heat.    'These kinds of citizen-based activities may appear  piecemeal, but they certainly contribute to energy saving,'  said Kurihara.     With a 30 percent increase in Japan’s carbon dioxide  emissions from homes since 1990, the government is pressed  to tackle the issue through the support of alternative  energy sources.    The Japanese government has introduced new regulations in  its bid to combat global warming, including energy saving  technology in new electronic devices and passenger vehicles,  and the use of energy consumption charts in public  institutions.     But it is the abundance of rain — seen here once every  three days on average — that Kawano believes Japan must tap  for better energy conservation.   (ENDS/AP/IPS/EN/CR/SK/JCS/10)