'If this is not God’s wrath, what is?' 40-year-old taxi driver Bakht Zada said of  the massive floods in Pakistan that have swept away his life earnings.    Speaking to IPS from Madyan city in Swat district in north-western Khyber  Pakhtunkhwa province, Zada might pin the blame for Pakistan’s worst floods  in 80 years on forces beyond humankind, but environment experts are  debating whether they are linked to a much more earthly phenomenon —  climate change.    Three weeks after unusually heavy rains began to pour on Jul.  12 — some  areas received up to 300 millimetres in a 36-hour period — Pakistan’s floods  have affected 14 million people and killed 1,600, apart from damaging huge  swathes of agricultural land, the mainstay of the economy.     The government, international humanitarian agencies and local charities  continue to grapple with the disaster, which first hit the north-western part  of this South Asian country and is now affecting the Punjab and Sindh  provinces.  The United Nations has appealed for 459 million U. S.  dollars, of  which 175 million dollars has been pledged.    Against this backdrop, experts have been trying to make sense of recent  instances of extreme weather phenomena.  Apart from the floods here, floods  in China killed more than 1,100 people, and drought, a heat wave and  wildfires hit Russia, in signs that seem consistent with the warming of the  planet due to enormous amounts of heat-trapping greenhouse gases like  carbon dioxide.     'Global warming results in catastrophic weather events.  The recent floods  are a result of climate change, undoubtedly,' insisted Simi Kamal, a  geographer and water specialist.    'Above-normal temperatures in the Indian Ocean give rise to increased  precipitation.  And in the north of Pakistan, when moisture-riddled wind  currents collide with the mountains and are pushed up into cooler altitudes,  moisture is released in the form of cloud bursts,' added Khalid Rashid, a  mathematician and physicist who studies changes in global weather patterns.    'This is what seems to have happened this year. '   Others are cautious about making categorical conclusions about links to  climate change, but agree that weather patterns have been changing,  becoming more extreme and more unpredictable.     'Climate scientists cannot be certain whether the current floods are an  extreme weather event of the current climate pattern or a change in it,' said  Ayub Qutub, an Islamabad-based specialist on water management.    Even R K Pachauri, chief of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change  (IPCC), says it would be scientifically incorrect to link any single set of events  with human-induced climate change.  But he agrees that there is enough  evidence to show an increase in the frequency and intensity of floods,  droughts and extreme precipitation events worldwide.     In fact, he told IPS: 'The floods of the kind that hit Pakistan may become  more frequent and more intense in the future in this and other parts of the  world. '    Danish Mustafa, a Pakistani water specialist who teaches geography at the  King’s College in London, acknowledges that 'rather unusual' monsoon  patterns from the Arabian Sea are becoming more frequent.     Ejaz Ahmad, deputy director of the World Wildlife Fund Pakistan, links  weather changes to 'change in land use patterns, heavy deforestation in the  northern part of Pakistan and the conflicts' rather than to climate change.   Still, he agrees that there have been more 'weird' weather events of late.     'Pakistan experienced a dry spell last March with hardly any rainfall and  wheat production was seriously damaged.  Then it rained in areas which do  not come under the monsoon range such as Gilgit-Baltistan, Broghil,.   Similarly, the frequency of cyclones has also increased,' Ahmad explained.  'A  year ago we received the Yemyin cyclone and then this year we had the Phet  cyclone.  In the past, we would experience cyclones (only) in decades. '   Kamala adds that rising temperatures help hasten the melting of water  sources like the Himalayas, north of Pakistan, that are the world’s third  largest repository of snow and ice.  'Our region (South Asia) is among the  climate change hotspots, and floods and droughts had been predicted by  international experts,' he pointed out.     Originating in the Tibetan plateau, the Himalayas also feeds the Indus River  basin after turning south from India.  The river, now swollen because of the  floods, runs along Pakistan’s entire length before discharging into the  Arabian Sea, a journey of some 3,180 kilometres.    'Global warming is going much faster, causing catastrophic weather  events,' explained Kamal.  'I’m not sure if this can be stopped now.  I’m not  even sure if we can adapt to the change as quickly. '   Already, Kamal says, Pakistan’s lack of preparedness has added to the toll  of the floods.  The Indus basin has always been prone to floods, prompting  her to to ask: 'Why are we always taken by surprise? Why don’t we build  scenarios, and based on them plan ahead for floods?'    But Maurizio Giuliano, spokesman of the United Nations Office for the  Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) in Islamabad, says some  preparations were put in place by the Pakistani government or 'the toll would  have been much higher. '   Still, there are lessons to be learned.  'We need the telemetric system on the  Indus rivers to function that also need to be extended to monitor flood waves  in real time,' suggestsed Mustafa.  'The  local-level capacity will have to be  strengthened to be the first line of defence in providing flood protection and  then relief.  The distant central government cannot do it. '   