Desertification has long been recognised as a major  environmental, economic and social problem for countries the  world over.  But despite major efforts, which started with the  United Nations Conference on Desertification (UNOCD) in 1977,  the process of land degradation is intensifying. Yukie Hori of the United Nations Convention to Combat  Desertification (UNCCD) told IPS that 'the Plan of Action to  Combat Desertification adopted at the 1977 conference did  not draw enough attention to improve land degradation in the  drylands'. However, it marked a new beginning in the fight against  desertification and 'supported a new, integrated approach to  the problem, emphasising action to promote sustainable  development at the community level', Hori said, adding that,  'This is what the UNCCD is today. '  Promoting actions to protect the world's drylands is the  purpose of the Decade for Deserts and the Fight against  Desertification, launched Monday, Aug.  16 and which will run  from January 2010 to December 2020. It coincides with the opening of the Second International  Conference on Climate, Sustainability and Development in  Semi-arid Regions, which is to take place in the city of  Fortaleza, in the dryland state of Ceará, Brazil. At a time when people in West Africa are suffering severe  food shortages as a result of prolonged drought, the  importance of drawing attention to desertification and its  consequences cannot be underestimated, experts say. The worst affected is the eastern Sahel region, where the  World Food Programme (WFP) is implementing an emergency  operation to assist as many as eight million drought- stricken people. The hope is that the initiatives of the Decade will help  reverse the desertification process, thus avoiding such  widespread drought-related crisis in the future. The global launch in Brazil will be complemented by regional  events, such as a joint United Nations Environment Programme  (UNEP) and United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) press  conference in Nairobi, Kenya. The simultaneous launches are to underline the fact that,  although the focus of the Decade is mainly the degradation  of drylands, 'Desertification is a global issue'. Desertification, defined as the degradation of dryland  ecosystems both by human activities and climatic variations,  occurs in all continents except Antarctica, but is of  special concern in arid and dry subhumid areas. The major human-related factors leading to desertification  are the unsustainable use of resources as a consequence of  population pressure, socioeconomic policies and land use  patterns. It is estimated that one billion people in over one hundred  countries are affected by desertification, and that if the  process is not stopped it could lead to the disruption of 44  percent of all the world's cultivated systems. 'When it happens, land degradation has far reaching  consequences which affect many realms of life, sometimes far  away,' Hori noted. Recent studies indicate that drylands take up 41. 3 percent  of the land's surface and are inhabited by 2. 1 billion  people. Dryland populations are amongst the most impoverished in the  world, with a per capita income on average almost 10 times  lower than OECD (Organisation for Economic Cooperation and  Development) countries.  Child mortality rates are also very  high, with an average of 54 for every 1,000 births. Although 'the process of desertification has intensified by  looking at overall statistics, it does not mean that  desertification has intensified everywhere,' Hori told IPS.   Improvement, she said, can be measured by 'the accumulation  of local examples of success'. One such example is that of the Africa Re-greening  Initiatives (ARI).  ARI promotes natural regeneration to  support farmers in adapting to climate change and to improve  food security in sub-Saharan Africa. By introducing more complex and productive systems, with the  integration of agriculture, livestock and forestry, ARI aims  to achieve a 10 percent increase in agricultural production,  with a consequent reduction of poverty of about six to nine  percent. Impacts of 'Farmer Managed Natural Regeneration' are not  limited to reversing desertification. Successful projects of this kind improve biodiversity and  the fertility of soils, but also have a social impact. They can improve the lives of women, who don't have to  travel as far to collect firewood, and reduce conflict  between herders and farmers, thanks to the higher  availability of resources. Limiting or reversing desertification can also stabilise  entire regions by stemming the flow of migrants who, due to  drought and food shortages, cross borders in search of more  fertile lands. Hori told IPS that, as in the Africa Re-greening  initiatives, 'Successful initiatives to stop desertification  must come from community people, supported by local,  national and international policy makers. 'The Decade, spearheaded by the UNCCD, in collaboration with  the Department of Public Information, the U. N.  Secretariat  in New York, the UNEP, the UNDP and the International Fund  for Agricultural Development (IFAD), aims to 'reach people  both in drylands and non-drylands, developed and developing  countries, over the importants of drylands as assets to the  global future'. 