U. N.  Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon returned from Pakistan  Monday calling the floods there the worst disaster he has ever  witnessed and urging the world community to speed up  assistance to the Pakistani people. Ban, who made a helicopter flight over four districts in  Punjab, one of the most populated and badly affected areas,  described the scenes as 'heart wrenching', and said he would  never forget the destruction and suffering in the flood-hit  areas. He announced a further 10 million dollars from the U. N. 's  central emergency response fund, making a total of 27  million dollars dispersed so far. Last week, the U. N.  launched an appeal to donor nations for  459. 7 million dollars, but by Friday had only raised 20  percent of that.  However, there are now reports that the  donations have reached 35 percent of the required sum. Nick Reader, a spokesperson for the United Nations Office  for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA), put the  sudden increase down to Ban's day-long visit to Pakistan  this past weekend, which 'helped raise awareness'. 'As more images continue to emerge, people are understanding  how serious the crisis is,' Reader told IPS, adding that  OCHA's 'assessment of needs is getting more sophisticated'. Nick Clegg, the UK's deputy prime minister, has called the  international response to the floods 'absolutely pitiful'. He noted that the scale of the disaster is such that the  public is struggling to understand just how great the need  for aid is, and that that may be why donations are low  compared to the 2005 Pakistan earthquake, the January Haiti  earthquake or the 2004 Indian Ocean Tsunami. Other reasons may include the slow pace of floods, compared  to more sudden and 'dramatic' earthquakes and tsunamis, and  the relatively low death toll of 1,600. Britain is currently at the top of the donor list, having  given around 26 million dollars in relief, closely followed  by Australia, the U. S. , Canada and Saudi Arabia. There has been some criticism over India's hesitancy in  coming to Pakistan's aid, prompting claims that a political  spat may be at the root of the belated and small pledge of  five million dollars, which is only a tiny fraction of  India's 500-million-dollar aid budget for the year. Critics claim that Pakistan was quick to help India after  the 2001 Gujarat earthquake, which killed 25,000 people. The floods, which started in the northwest mountainous  provinces and have affected 20 million people, have now  spread to the southern provinces of Sindh and neighboring  Balochistan. John Holmes, under-secretary-general for humanitarian  affairs and U. N.  emergency relief coordinator, said last  week that critical priorities include shelter, food  assistance, clean water and emergency medical supplies. The U. N.  High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) says it has  purchased around 69,000 tents, but supplies are dwindling  because of the massive shelter requirements in hard-hit  areas. Some truckloads were unable to reach their destinations  because of floods and landslides, so agencies such as the  World Food Programme (WFP) are using donkeys to reach  isolated areas like Balochistan and Khyber Pakhtunkhwa  provinces. It is also important for emergency medical supplies to reach  all affected areas, as the lack of clean water and adequate  sanitation has massively increased the risk of diarrhea and  skin diseases. Reader told IPS that 'the spread of water-borne diseases is  one of the U. N. 's main concerns. ' These include typhoid,  cholera, hepatitis A and B. The fears were confirmed by the discovery of the first cases  of cholera in the Swat Valley last week. Stagnant water is also an ideal breeding ground for  mosquitoes, which spread malaria and dengue fever. 'The World Health Organisation (WHO) is assisting the  government in supplying medicines and vaccines,' Reader told  IPS, adding that they are currently 'ready to deal with up  to 1. 5 million cases of disease'. Another concern is that terrorist and militant groups may be  operating amongst the victims, offering food and shelter, to  gain a foothold in the affected areas. The warning comes from the U. N.  special envoy for assistance  to Pakistan, Jean-Maurice Ripert, who claimed that the  terror group Jamaat-ud-Dawa may be 'taking advantage of the  circumstances to score points'. When asked if the activities of these groups are of any  immediate concern, Reader answered that the immediate focus  is 'on giving assistance to those who needed it', and that  OCHA 'is working with a lot of good local NGO's, with which  it has worked in past crisis'. However, many locals affected by the floods are reportedly  unhappy with the government's late response to the crises,  sparking clashes and protests, especially in southern  regions. Without adequate donations by rich countries and a more  prompt response by the Pakistani government, the floods risk  having not only immediate and tragic consequences, but also  severe long-term consequences on the country's already  fragile economy. 