The new president of the International Fund for Agricultural Development takes  over at a time when women farmers are becoming a growing force - without a  growing voice. This could present a major challenge to Kanayo F.  Nwanze who was chosen  IFAD president at a meeting in Rome of representatives of the 165 member  countries of the UN organisation for financing agricultural development.   Nwanze, a Nigerian national, was elected Thursday for a four-year term,  ahead of five other candidates from Pakistan, Germany, Israel, Niger and  India. IFAD has made the issue of women farmers a key challenge, together with  price rise and climate change. IFAD experts say that the past decade has seen women's participation in  agricultural labour grow by a third, and in the off-farm labour market by 10  percent.  While there is no official figure for the number of women farmers  worldwide, around 30 percent of African smallholder farms are headed by  women.  The work of women farmers is often not recognised.  'Worldwide in  developing countries women do most of the farming work although their  work and their role remain invisible, unrecognised and undocumented in  statistics,' says Annina Lubbock from the IFAD gender-technical advisory  division.  'And yet in Africa, for example, they're producing between 60 and 80  percent of the whole food. 'Lubbock says women live with all of the constraints that affect all smallholder  farmers - difficulty in access to credit, to services, lack of money for inputs,  poor infrastructure and poor markets.  But beyond these are constraints that  specifically affect women. 'They have a huge workload that comes from having to combine their  productive work with their domestic work and caring for their families,' said  Lubbock.   'They don't have access to property, they don't get access to  extension services. ' These services offer information such as patterns in crop  prices, new seed varieties, and training in the use of new technologies. One reason that women's voices are not heard is their weak representation in  farmers and producers organisations, said Lubbock.  'They're heard down at  the grassroots but not at the higher levels. 'Some groups are working to change that.  'What our national members do to  make women's voices heard and articulated is give 'affirmative action' to  them,' says Estrella Penunia, secretary-general of the Asian Farmers  Association for Sustainable Rural Development.  'This means at least giving 30  percent of seats in the training, board and governance structure organisation  to women. 'The association, based in the Philippines, includes nine farmers'  organisations in eight Asian countries, representing around ten million  farmers. In the Philippines and in Korea women have their own independent  organisations working in parallel with other farmers organisations, Penunia  told IPS.  'They do a lot of work in terms of making governments respond to  their need for credit, for capital, for access to resources, and working hand in  hand with male members of farmers organisations in lobbying governments. ' In the Philippines 5 percent of local and national government budgets are set  aside for gender related development issues.  'But this is something that  needed to be fought for,' Penunia told IPS.  'If we hadn't fought for that,  money would have gone to dance rooms and parties or whatever in the name  of gender and development.  But women farmers are there to tell the  government, put this in agriculture, put this in training. . . they are organised to  lobby, to dialogue and to negotiate with their governments on policies. '  A similar struggle was launched for land rights in the Philippines.  'When the  government gives certificates of land property there is only men's name in  the title; women farmers' organisations asked to put the name of both man  and woman in there, and in the end it worked. 'India is supporting women's participation in policy dialogues.  'The  decentralised government system is strengthening local governments that  now can take decisions over resources, and the quota system will make  women participate in the decentralised decision making bodies,' Eija Pehu  from the agriculture and rural development department at the World Bank  told IPS. Pehu said that a recent 200 million dollar World Bank programme to support  smallholder agriculture in the state of Andhra Pradesh in India started initially  without any differentiation for women farmers. 'But then the state leadership realised that there were a lot of self-help  groups run by women, pooled together to run community-based  procurement centres for agricultural products like grains, vegetables and  fruit. ' The World Bank consequently began to address women's issues  specifically.  