The U. N.  General Assembly met Thursday to express the world  community's solidarity with the people of Pakistan and to urge  member states to step up their aid commitment to the flood  stricken country. Envoys called for 'filling the gap' in the initial appeal of  460 million dollars launched last week.  So far, only half of  that has been pledged. 'Pakistan is facing a slow-motion tsunami,' said Secretary- General Ban Ki-moon, who visited Pakistan last weekend.   'This is a disaster, a global challenge.  It is one of the  greatest tests of global solidarity of our times. 'Pakistan's Foreign Minister Shah Mahmood Quereshi drew  attention to the severe impact the floods have had on the  mainly agrarian economy and the dangers of food shortages in  the sixth most populous country in the world. He also stressed that Pakistan is still committed to the  fight against terrorism, but added that if the upheaval and  economic losses caused by the flood are not dealt with  effectively, the hard won gains made by the government in  tackling extremism and terrorism may be undermined. U. S.  Secretary of State Hilary Clinton announced that the  U. S. , already the biggest donor, will give an extra 60  million dollars in addition to the 90 million already  pledged.  She also said that part of the 7. 5 billion dollars  that the U. S.  will give to Pakistan over the next five years  for non-military assistance will be devoted to rebuilding  the country's infrastructure in the mid- to long-term  future. The European Union was represented in the assembly meeting  by Belgian Foreign Minister Steven Vanackere.  European Union  Foreign Policy Chief Catherine Ashton was unable to attend  the meeting because as representative of the EU, which is  not formally a member of the assembly, she has 'no speaking  rights'. However, Ashton said that the EU will increase its  assistance to Pakistan by 30 million euros, to reach a total  of 105 million euros (135 million dollars). The list of over 60 speakers included countries such as  Georgia, Turkey, United Arab Emirates and Italy.  However,  only about half of those countries took the floor as the  meeting was adjourned early. Quereshi claimed that the new pledges were an encouraging  sign of solidarity and that he would be returning to  Pakistan reassured that the initial 460-million-dollar  initial appeal would be reached. Earlier in the day, several dignitaries made a high-profile  appeal for aid before a morning crowd at the Asia Society.   The speakers also touched on the ways in which their  organisations are helping. Rajiv Shah, administrator of the U. S.  Agency for  International Development, pointed to the successes of U. S.   help in response to the 2005 earthquake centred in Pakistan  administrated Kashmir.  There, the goal was to 'build back  better', he said. Shah hoped the response to this disaster will follow a  similar model, using new technology and new strategies to  rebuild the infrastructure and communities more resilient  than before.  'The recovery will take a long time,' said  Shah, 'but it also affords an opportunity to build back in a  better way. 'For now, the focus is simply on helping the people on the  ground who are continuing to suffer.  Shah said that aid is  currently meeting the needs of 700,000 to 1. 2 million  people, but that this is clearly not enough.  About 20  million people have been affected by the floods, as well as  1. 7 million acres of productive, planted farmland and the  livestock there, he said. But some are willing to look deeper than the immediate  emergency.  Billionaire philanthropist George Soros noted the  donor fatigue 'in responding to these disasters because  there are too many of them…They are connected.  There is  climate change and it has a human cause. ' Soros said  governments must act to help Pakistan but 'must also do  something about the root causes,' including reducing fossil  fuel emissions. Foreign Minister Qureshi echoed those climate concerns.  He  pointed to the combination of high rainfall in the north,  increased glacier melt in the Himalayas and unseasonable  monsoons as leading to the devastating floods. As for the U. S.  response, U. S.  special envoy Richard  Holbrooke says it is 'focused solely on helping.  We're not  doing it because of Pakistan's neighbours, we're doing it  because Pakistan matters. ''We want to be the first with the most assistance, and we  have been,' Holbrooke said, though he noted the response  will require an international and continued effort. *Matthew Berger reported from Washington. 