The U. S.  state of Mississippi recently reopened all of its  fishing areas.  The problem is that commercial shrimpers refuse  to trawl because they fear the toxicity of the waters and  marine life due to the BP oil disaster. 'We come out and catch all our Mississippi oysters right  here,' James 'Catfish' Miller, a commercial shrimper in  Mississippi, told IPS.  Pointing to the area in the  Mississippi Sound from his shrimp boat, he added, 'It's the  only place in Mississippi to catch oysters, and there is oil  and dispersants all over the top of it. 'On Aug.  6, Mississippi's Department of Marine Resources  (DMR) and the Mississippi Department of Environmental  Quality, in coordination with the National Oceanic and  Atmospheric Administration and the U. S.  Food and Drug  Administration, ordered the reopening of all Mississippi  territorial waters to all commercial and recreational  finfish and shrimp fishing activities that were part of the  precautionary closures following the BP oil rig disaster in  April.  At least five million barrels flowed into the Gulf  before the well was shut earlier this month. But Miller, along with many other commercial shrimpers,  refuses to trawl. Miller took IPS out on his shrimp boat, along with  commercial shrimper Mark Stewart, and Jonathan Henderson of  the Gulf Restoration Network, an environmental group working  to document and alleviate the effects of BP's oil disaster. The goal was to prove to the public that their fishing  grounds are contaminated with both oil and dispersants.   Their method was simple — they tied an absorbent rag to a  weighted hook, dropped it overboard for a short duration of  time, then pulled it up to find the results.  The rags were  covered in a brown oily substance that the fishermen  identified as a mix of BP's crude oil and toxic dispersants. Miller and Stewart, who were both in BP's Vessels of  Opportunity programme and were trained in identifying oil  and dispersants, have been accused by some members of  Mississippi's state government of lying about their  findings. 'Why would we lie about oil and dispersant in our waters,  when our livelihoods depend on our being able to fish here?'  Miller asked IPS.  'I want this to be cleaned up so we can  get back to how we used to live.  But it doesn't make sense  for us or anyone else to fish if our waters are toxified.  I  don't know why people are angry at us for speaking the  truth.  We're not the ones who put the oil in the water. 'IPS watched Miller and Stewart conduct eight tests in  various places around Mississippi Sound.  One of them was  less than a quarter mile from the mouth of Pass Christian  Harbor, and another was less than one mile from a public  beach.  Every single test found the absorbent rags stained  with brown oil. During an earlier test round, the two fishermen brought out  scientist Dr.  Ed Cake of Gulf Environmental Associates. Dr.  Cake wrote of the experience: 'When the vessel was  stopped for sampling, small, 0. 5- to 1. 0-inch-diameter  bubbles would periodically rise to the surface and shortly  thereafter they would pop leaving a small oil sheen.   According to the fishermen, several of BP's Vessels-of- Opportunity (Carolina Skiffs with tanks of dispersants  [Corexit?]) were hand spraying in Mississippi Sound off the  Pass Christian Harbor in prior days/nights.  It appears to  this observer that the dispersants are still in the area and  are continuing to react with oil in the waters off Pass  Christian Harbor. 'Shortly thereafter, Miller took the samples to a community  meeting in nearby D'Iberville to show fishermen and  families.  At the meeting, fishermen unanimously supported a  petition calling for the firing of Dr.  Bill Walker, the head  of Mississippi's DMR, who is responsible for opening the  fishing grounds. On Monday, Aug.  9, Walker, despite ongoing reports of tar  balls, oil, and dispersants being found in Mississippi  waters, declared 'there should be no new threats' and issued  an order for all local coast governments to halt ongoing oil  disaster work being funded by BP money that was granted to  the state. Recent days in Mississippi waters have found fishermen and  scientists finding oil in Garden Pond on Horn Island,  massive fish kills near Cat Island and Biloxi, 'black water'  in Mississippi Sound, oil inside Pass Christian Harbor, and  submerged oil in Pass Christian, in addition to what Miller  and Stewart showed IPS and others with their testing. 'We've sent samples to all the news media we know, here in  Mississippi and in [Washington] D. C. ,' Stewart, a third  generation fisherman from Ocean Springs, told IPS.  'We had  Ray Mabus's people on this boat, and we sent them away with  contaminated samples they watched us take, and we haven't  heard back from them. 'Raymond Mabus is the United States secretary of the Navy and  a former governor of Mississippi.  President Barack Obama  tasked him with developing 'a long-term Gulf Coast  Restoration Plan as soon as possible. 'Mabus has been accused by many Gulf Coast fishermen of not  living up to his task. Stewart told IPS, 'Normally we have a lot of white shrimp in  the Sound right now.  You can catch 500 to 800 pounds a  night, but right now, there are very few people shrimping,  and those that are, are catching nothing or maybe 200 pounds  per night.  You can't even pay your expenses on 200 pounds  per night. ''We think they opened shrimp season prematurely,' Miller  told IPS, 'How can we put our product back on the market  when everybody in America knows what happened down here? I  have seen so many dead animals in the last few months I  can't even keep count. 'On Thursday, several commercial shrimpers, including Miller  and Stewart, held a press conference at the Biloxi Marina.   Other fishermen there were not fishing because they feared  making people sick with seafood they might catch. 'I don't want people to get sick,' Danny Ross, a commercial  fisherman from Biloxi told IPS, 'We want the government and  BP to have transparency with the Corexit dispersants. 'Ross said he has watched horseshoe crabs trying to crawl out  of the water, and other marine life like stingrays and  flounder trying to escape the water as well.  He believes  this is because the water is hypoxic due to the toxicity of  the toxic dispersants, of which BP admits to using at least  1. 9 million gallons. 'I will not wet a net and catch shrimp until I know it's  safe to do so,' Ross added.  'I have no way of life now.  I  can't shrimp and others are calling the shots.  For the next  20 years, what am I supposed to do? Because that's how long  it's going to take for our waters to be safe again. 'David Wallis, another fisherman from Biloxi, attended the  press conference. 'We don't feel our seafood is safe, and we demand more  testing be done,' Wallis told IPS.  'I've seen crabs crawling  out of the water in the middle of the day.  This is going to  be affecting us far into the future. ''A lot of fishermen feel as we do.  Most of them I talk to  don't want the season opened, for our safety as well as  others,' Wallis added, 'Right now there's barely any shrimp  out there to catch.  We should be overloaded with shrimp  right now.  That's not normal.  I won't eat any seafood that  comes out of these waters, because it's not safe. '