Between April and August this year, 4. 9 million barrels of oil  were spilled into the Gulf of Mexico.  How much remains today  is not yet clear and is a hot topic of debate among academic  and government scientists. The largest accidental oil spill in history began four  months ago Friday following an explosion on the BP-leased  Deepwater Horizon drilling rig off the Louisiana coast.   Since the capping of the gushing well on Jul.  15, there have  been a flurry of efforts to put a number on the quantity of  oil remaining — and its potential impacts. Sparking the debate over this number was a U. S.  government  report released Aug.  4 that estimated 74 percent of the  leaked oil had been captured, burned, evaporated or  dissolved. Marine scientists at the University of Georgia challenged  those estimates earlier this week, saying that based on  their studies as much as 79 percent of the oil still  remains. Neither study has been peer-reviewed or published in a  scientific journal, leading many to treat them simply as  competing estimates. But they do point to the range of possible estimates in the  wake of the massive oil spill and the questionable accuracy  of government reports on the extent of the spill and its  damages. If you add up what was pumped to tankers at the surface, the  effects of the dispersants in encouraging digestion by  bacteria over evaporation, and what was burned off, you can  get a number, incident commander for the gulf oil disaster  Thad Allen said Friday in Washington.  'If you add all that  up and solve for X, you get 26 percent' as the amount of the  4. 9 million barrels that remains in the Gulf. Realising that this number is only one estimate of many is  important, though, he said.  'Is it completely accurate? No.   It's based on certain assumptions,' Allen said. The government numbers were cast into even deeper doubt by a  study published in Friday's issue of the journal Science. Highlighting the study was data from June on the size of a  plume of oil compounds near the ruptured well — at least 22  miles long and 1. 2 miles wide, 650 feet high and over 3,000  feet below the surface of the Gulf — and the finding that  this plume would likely persist for some time. Despite speculations that droplets of oil below the surface  were being easily biodegraded, the plume shows that oil 'is  persisting for longer periods than we would have expected,'  said Richard Camilli, of the Wood's Hole Oceanographic  Institution and the paper's lead author. Analyzing the quantity and the toxicity of the oil in that  plume and will still take some time, Camilli and his  colleagues said Thursday in Washington, and the fact that  their samples were taken in June likely means the plume has  changed in size and composition since then. Yet the study does show that there is likely a much more  complicated answer to the question of what happened to all  that oil then Washington has so far let on. Following the questions raised about the government's  findings on the amount of oil left in the Gulf, government  findings over the safety of seafood from the region have  also come under scrutiny. Senator Ed Markey held a hearing on Capitol Hill Thursday to  look deeper into the matter.  His and others' main concern is  that while satisfactory testing may be done to determine the  presence of oil in seafood, the dispersants that were used  in the gulf may not all show up in those tests. Most likely, the amount of chemicals in organisms varies  from species to species, with oysters the most likely to  remain contaminated, scientists have said. The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration says it  is continuing to monitor the level of contaminants in gulf  seafood, but 54 percent of U. S.  respondents to a poll taken  Aug.  11 to 16 by the Associated Press remain unconvinced  about the food's safety. An end in sightAllen said he understood the frustration caused by the  inability of the government and BP to guarantee when the  final operation to shut off the well completely and  permanently would take place, but that the preparations for  this 'bottom kill' are underway. 'Sometime in the week after Labour Day we will be in a  position to execute the bottom kill,' he said.  'We are down  to the very end of this process but we are moving  cautiously. ''We are not done.  Nobody has declared mission accomplished,'  he added. In the weeks and months to come, several criminal  investigations will look into the causes and handling of the  blowout and the clean-up work will continue, with a greater  focus on the coasts and marshes that have been affected. We are in the 'process of transitioning to a lot of work  that's inshore,' said Allen.  He said he and others and had  been having discussions with local officials to determine  'how clean is clean'. 'BP will not be involved in that' inshore work, he said. 