Six hundred delegates from more than 80 countries flocked to  Montreal Aug.  20-23 for the CIVICUS World Assembly in search  of innovative ways to approach global challenges like poverty  and climate change. An international alliance of about 1,000 civil society  organisations, CIVICUS concentrates its efforts on  strengthening citizen action and civil society, especially  where citizens' right to freedom of association are  threatened. This is an opportunity for civil society to grow together,  said Anabel Cruz, the chair of the board of CIVICUS.  'The  world assembly is always a very interactive platform for  sharing experience, learning from each other and discussing  solutions.  I hope people can come back to their countries  with more knowledge and joint projects,' Cruz told IPS.   'This is the start of a process, not the end. 'The conference took on three broad issues — economic  justice, development effectiveness and climate change, with  economic justice topping the agenda.  Among the headliners of  the discussion was Sanjeev Khagram, the lead author of  'Voices of the Vulnerable', a U. N.  report on the impacts of  the economic crisis on the poor. Khagram stressed the need for civil society to shift where  it channels its efforts.  He told IPS that relative to the  U. N. , the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund  (IMF), the real forces in setting the rules for the global  financial system are the Basel institutions and the  Financial Stability Board (FSB). 'Ordinary citizens have no engagement there but the real  power is there because they are the ones that coordinated  the bailouts and set new regulations for the future,' he  said. He argued that as these institutions attract a host of  actors - bringing together private bankers, central bankers  and ministers of finance - this is the place where civil  society should be lodging its appeals. Civil society has the responsibility to develop, promote and  hold these financial institutions accountable to norms and  principles that reflect human rights, said Khagram. Taking stock of how civil society organisations can improve  and where potential lies also underpin the spirit of the  conference. Ingrid Srinath, the secretary-general of CIVICUS, noted the  importance of overcoming internal divisions, which manifests  itself in the competition for funding.  'If we are actually  going to achieve the synergistic benefits of both  development funding and climate funding…the climate folks  and development folks need start working together a lot more  closely,' she said.  'I think we have to begin to say the struggles to end  global poverty and to avert catastrophic climate change are  two sides of the same coin,' said Kumi Naidoo, the executive  director of Greenpeace International. Tomas Brundin of the Swedish Foreign Ministry addressed the  need for governments to recognise that civil society is the  real agent of social change.  'We need to move from rhetoric  to action and change our deep-seated behaviours,' he said. 'One of the problems that we face is that we tend to talk to  our equals and to focus on the executive branch but not  where the real ownership should be — with parliament and  civil society,' he added. While not on the agenda this year, civil society  organisations continue to envision and pursue ways of  demonstrating accountability. Cruz said the best self-defence for civil society  organisations is self-regulation, which means setting out to  collectively agree on certain principles and standards that  are then presented to the public.  Naidoo suggests that on  top of self-regulation, NGOs can also be subject to the  Accountability Charter. Cruz and Naidoo cautioned against the process of  certification, a service offered by an external party — an  NGO or from the private sector.  The process evaluates the  quality of the organisation to assess whether it is  representative and accountable to the people. Naidoo argues the Charter is a more authoritative measure  because while major civil society leaders brought it about,  it consists of an independent panel that makes judgments and  includes a sanctions component. 'There were some organisations that approached me and I felt  that they had no empathy with the sector, they were just  trying to develop some income-generating profit,' he said. He also cites diversity as an important consideration, given  the differences in resources and the scope of its focus -  civil society organisations cannot be subject to one  standard. 'I'm not sure that an external party can assess the real  value of civil society,' said Cruz. 