Pakistani officials continued their quest for help in light of  the floods that have affected 20 million people in their  country by meeting with officials at the International  Monetary Fund here Monday. The country has expressed hope that the IMF would loosen  terms attached to a 10. 66-billion-dollar loan granted in  2008 due to the economic impact of the floods.  The loan  terms would require deficit and inflation targets Pakistan  is not sure it will be able to meet with a post-flood  economy. On Saturday, Masood Ahmed, director of the IMF's Middle East  and Central Asia Department, said in a statement that in  addition to the 'suffering to millions of people [the  floods] also pose a massive economic challenge to the people  and government of Pakistan. ''The scale of the tragedy means that the country's budget  and macroeconomic prospects, which are being supported by an  IMF financed programme, will also need to be reviewed,' he  said. Ahmed said the Fund looked forward to meeting with Pakistani  officials to discuss 'ways in which the IMF can assist  Pakistan at this difficult juncture. ' The specifics of what  was discussed at Monday's meetings are not yet known. If the terms are not relaxed, officials have said they will  instead seek a new loan package under new terms. Pakistan has already been promised emergency loans of one  billion dollars from the World Bank and two billion dollars  from the Asian Development Bank. The floods are reported to have already taken over 1,600  lives and displaced 4. 6 million people as well as causing  massive infrastructure damage and covering 1. 7 million acres  of productive farmland. Meanwhile, U. S.  officials followed up on Secretary of State  Hillary Clinton's announcement of an expanded emergency aid  package at the United Nations on Friday by quantifying some  of their efforts on the ground in Pakistan. Noting that the U. S.  is the 'first and most among  contributors' to the relief effort, Deputy Special  Representative for Afghanistan and Pakistan Dan Feldman said  the government was looking to redirect existing foreign aid  funds to Pakistan to meet the needs of flood victims as  quickly as possible. Clinton had announced an increase in aid from 90 million to  150 million dollars.  'This money is going towards local and  international NGOs, towards U. N . agencies, towards  operations for NDMA [National Disaster Management Authority]  through the government of Pakistan' as well as in-kind and  technical assistance, Feldman said. In terms of specifics, 'seven helicopters operating out of  Peshawar and Multan have rescued and transported  approximately 1400 individuals and delivered nearly 200,000  pounds of equipment and supply cargo,' according to William  McGlynn, principal deputy assistant secretary for the Bureau  of International Narcotics and Law Enforcement. The international community is delivering food to close to  two million people in the northern part of the country,  according to Acting Director of USAID's Office of U. S.   Foreign Disaster Assistance Mark Ward.  'We're adding 140,000  beneficiaries a day in the food distribution so I think this  showing signs that the access is getting a little bit easier  in the north,' he said. He says they have also been able to consult and treat 1. 5  million people 'all over the country' regarding health  concerns, helped WHO deliver medical kits to over two  million people, and have provided 700,000 mosquito nets for  families returning home. 'Malaria is getting to be a concern — just because of the  time of year and so much water,' said Ward, though cholera  remains the top disease concern. And seven more 'giant water treatment machines' will be  delivered this week to assist the six that are already  churning out over four million litres of safe drinking water  this month, continued Ward. 'Clean water is still a huge issue.  Maybe the most important  issue in the relief effort,' he added. In addition to the water treatment machines, relief flights  this week will also bring boats and blankets. Going forward, 'We're looking at a series of follow-on  meetings from the UNGA special session, multilateral in  nature, over the next few months to continue to gauge and  assess what the needs will be and how we can best meet those  as we shift from relief efforts to reconstruction and  recovery,' Feldman said. Those meetings will include a Friends of Democratic Pakistan  meeting planned for Oct.  14 and 15 in Brussels, a meeting of  special representatives to Pakistan also in October and  possibly a meeting on the margins of the September U. N.   General Assembly. 