Despite its minuscule share of world trade, fair trade is a booming business,  importing certified foodstuffs and products from all over the world to Northern  supermarkets.  But there is increasing concern that this growth is yet to benefit  poor countries in Africa. The movement to ensure decent prices and working conditions for producers  in the developing world represents less than one percent of global  commercial exchanges.  But, according to the Fairtrade Labelling Organisations, one of its main  promoters, the tiny sector’s sales still notched 3. 6 billion euro in 2009.  That  same year, despite the global financial and economic crisis, fair trade sales in  France alone increased by 10 percent.  But fair trade’s expansion is much  slower in poor countries in Africa. 'It is obvious that fair trade does not focus enough on least developed  countries,' says Christophe Eberhart, of Ethiquable, a cooperative that  imports fair trade foodstuffs to France from African least developed countries  (LDCs).  One of Ethiquable’s initiatives supports vanilla farmers in Comoros, an island  state off the eastern coast of Africa.  The cooperative buys their flavouring  vanilla pods at 100 euro per kilo, instead of the market prices of 25 euro. Fair trade statistics do not disaggregate production figures by region, or by  countries’ income category, which makes it hard to see the extent to which  fair trade benefits LDCs.  Moreover, 'it is much easier to implement fair trade  in countries such as Costa Rica, Thailand or India than in many sub-Saharan  countries', Eberhart contends. Fair trade is increasingly popular with European consumers.  In France, the  Platform for Fair Trade ('Plate-Forme pour le Commerce Équitable' in French)  polled consumers and found that 95 percent of them have heard of fair trade.   But most fair trade success stories hailing from the South are from South  America and Asia, rather than Africa. The Fairtrade Labelling Organisations’ 2009 report lists a growing number of  consumer prizes awarded to fair trade products.  Among an estimated 6,000  products, Bolivian vodka, Ecuadorian spicy banana chips and other niche  delicacies were endorsed.  But no African goods made the list. 'Fair trade importers such as ourselves work mainly with associations or  cooperatives of producers,' Eberhart explains.  'And these structures, which  facilitate technical and financial assistance to farmers, are historically much  more common in Latin America. ''In Peru, for instance, the farmers’ cooperative running our jam  manufacturing plant got help from local specialists to monitor quality,' he  points out.  'But in Mali, where we set up a unit to transform fonio (a grain  variety), we have struggled to find local expertise to assist us with food safety  processes. 'There are other structural challenges to trading with African LDCs.  In order  for fair trade to benefit a maximum number of people, decent prices and  livelihood-sustaining wages have to be paid not only to producers but to  workers throughout the entire production chain, including those working in  packaging, transporting and shipping. 'Our approach to fair trade aims at working directly with producers’  organisations, and ensuring they export their own goods,' says Eberhart.   'But, in Africa, we have observed that many producers rely on private  exporters. ' Farmers thus lose the profits made on exports, which are generally much  higher than those made merely on production. 'This does not help producers achieve greater capacity or autonomy,'  Eberhart laments.  'In Madagascar, for instance, very few producers and  cooperatives export their products directly.  Most of them rely on a few, very  large exporters who hold all the bargaining power,' he adds. As in all sectors of trade, size matters.  Even producers benefiting from higher  fair trade prices and expertise have to negotiate shipping fees.  Larger  producer organisations have more leverage. 'Ethiopian cooperatives producing coffee, for instance, tend to do well as they  have larger volumes and better expertise,' says Eberhart. The Fairtrade Labelling Organisations have developed a standard that applies  not only to producers but also to traders.  Its certification body, FLO-CERT,  audits and certifies producers and traders before sales start.  But limited  resources and market structures make it almost impossible to check the  entire chain from African fields to supermarket shelves. Still, networks are expanding rapidly.  The World Fair Trade Organisation now  claims 600 member organisations in 70 countries.  It is estimated that 1. 5  million workers and producers participate in fair trade in Asia, Latin America  and Africa. 'Our aim is for fair trade to be a real lever for development,' says Eberhart.   'For that to happen, we need to help small farmers develop their own local  capacity for the processing of their products and not to just facilitate sales. ' 