Another massive fish kill, this time in Louisiana, has alarmed  scientists, fishers and environmentalists who believe they are  caused by oil and dispersants. On Aug.  22, St.  Bernard Parish authorities reported a huge  fish kill at the mouth of the Mississippi River Gulf Outlet. 'By our estimates there were thousands - and I'm talking  about 5,000 to 15,000 - dead fish,' St.  Bernard Parish  President Craig Taffaro told reporters.  'Different species  were found dead, including crabs, sting rays, eel, drum,  speckled trout, red fish, you name it, included in that  kill. 'The next day, a thick, orange substance with tar balls and a  'strong diesel smell' was discovered around Grassy Island,  near the fish kill, according to a news release. Taffaro admitted that there was oil in the area, but  cautioned against assuming it was the cause of the fish  kill.  Dr.  Ed Cake, a biological oceanographer, as well as a marine  and oyster biologist, has 'great concern' about this fish  kill, and many others in recent weeks, which he feels are  likely directly related to the BP oil disaster.  'As a scientist, my belief is that this fish kill is 75  percent likely due to hypoxic conditions, not enough oxygen  in the water to sustain life,' Dr.  Cake said.  'Because it  was both bottom dwelling fish and crab, and other fish from  the middle of the water column, whatever caused this covered  the entire water column.  That gives me great concern.  The  scientist in me says there was some other triggering  mechanism. 'Dr.  Cake believes the 'triggering mechanism' is likely oil  and toxic dispersants from the BP oil disaster. Recent weeks have seen other huge fish kills.  One occurred  in Mississippi from Long Beach to Pass Christian, and  another at Cat Island.  The kill earlier this week in East  St.  Bernard Parish is of note, because taken in the context  of the other two, all of these areas share the same body of  water — that which comprises both of the Mississippi and  Chandeleur Sounds. On Aug.  18, a team from Georgia Sea Grant and the University  of Georgia released a report that estimates that 70 to 79  percent of the oil that gushed from the well 'has not been  recovered and remains a threat to the ecosystem'. Nevertheless, regarding the St.  Bernard Parish fish kill,  the head fisheries biologist for the state of Louisiana,  Randy Pausina, blamed it solely on hypoxic conditions caused  by extreme heat mixed with nutrient-rich waters. But Dr.  Cake, along with commercial fishermen and Gulf Coast  environmentalists, are drawing direct parallels to BP's oil  disaster and the use of toxic dispersants as the likely  cause of the increased numbers of fish kills they are  witnessing. 'There are several parallels to the spill,' Dr.  Cake added.   'We have evidence from fisherman operating in the VOO  [Vessels of Opportunity] fleet and fishermen in the area who  observed the spraying of dispersants by both aircraft and  vessels in the immediate vicinity of the fish kills.  Therein  lies one triggering mechanism. 'He said another factor is that dispersed oil 'provides  nutrients for phytoplankton, and this may have triggered a  bloom of plankton, otherwise known as a red tide, and you  would then have a fish kill from the red tide organisms.  I  understand that the phytoplankton out there is causing fish  kills, but still the triggering mechanism is the presence of  the oil and dispersants. ''A fish kill from a red tide, as I've observed, causes fish  to come to the surface to be in distress, flopping around,  and slowly they die, and new ones come up.  This was not  observed in any of these kills.  All we had was a massive  amount of dead fish coming to the surface,' he said. Two commercial fishermen in Mississippi who worked in BP's  VOO programme, James Miller and Mark Stewart, recently told  IPS they were eyewitnesses to BP spraying dispersants via  airplane and from boats into areas of the Mississippi Sound,  as well as outside the barrier islands.  'Right now there's barely any shrimp out there to catch,'  David Wallis, a fisherman from Biloxi, told IPS.  'We should  be overloaded with shrimp right now.  That's not normal.  I  won't eat any seafood that comes out of these waters,  because it's not safe. 'Chasidy Hobbs, with Emerald Coastkeeper in Pensacola,  Florida, is on the City of Pensacola Environmental Advisory  Board and directs the environmental litigation research  firm, Geography and Environment. Hobbs recently informed IPS of a one mile-long fish kill on  Aug.  20 near Pensacola, and said of the BP oil disaster and  ongoing use of dispersants, 'We're poisoning the entire Gulf  of Mexico food web.  It's criminal. ''There are two theories on what is causing these fish  kills,' Jonathan Henderson, with the Gulf Restoration  Network, told IPS.  'Hypoxia and the BP disaster.  Whichever  is the cause, they are both still bad. 'Henderson has logged hundreds of hours in boats and planes  across the Gulf documenting the oil disaster.  He has seen  fish kills himself. 'A few weeks ago at Pass Christian, I saw flounder, trout,  and crabs, washed up into the rock barriers in front of the  marina,' he said. The growing dead zone in the Gulf, which scientists believe  will be the size of Massachusetts this year, is now already  extremely close to shore. 'The fact that the dead zone is this close to shore is  alarming to me,' Henderson said, 'And we don't know the  effect the dispersants are having on the dead zones and it  very well may be that they are making it worse. ' According to the EPA's latest analysis of dispersant  toxicity released in the document 'Comparative Toxicity of  Eight Oil Dispersant Products on Two Gulf of Mexico Aquatic  Test Species', Corexit 9500, along with 9527 - BP's two  dispersants used in the Gulf - 'at a concentration of 42  parts per million, killed 50 percent of mysid shrimp  tested. ' Most of the remaining shrimp died shortly  thereafter. 'Local fisherman in Alabama report sighting tremendous  numbers of dolphins, sharks, and fish moving in towards  shore as the initial waves of oil and dispersant approached  in June,' Environmentalist Jerry Cope wrote recently.  'Many  third- and fourth-generation fishermen declared emphatically  that they had never seen or heard of any similar event in  the past.  Scores of animals were fleeing the leading edge of  toxic dispersant mixed with oil.  The Gulf of Mexico from the  Source into the shore is a giant kill zone. ''I was amongst all these dead fish in St.  Bernard Parish,'  Dr.  Cake added, 'And there were off-bottom fish there as  well, which was the same thing we had at the fish kills at  Cat Island and Long Beach-Pass Christian, so I see a trend  here.  Prior to the BP oil spill and the widespread  applications of dispersants in all three of these recent  fish-kill areas, we have never had evidence of such  widespread kills. '