With cleanup of the Gulf of Mexico barely underway, energy  companies are already assuming a crouching stance in  anticipation of a no-holds-barred attack by environmentalists  on what the industry says is the next major breakthrough in  natural resource extraction. The breakthrough is called fracking - short for hydraulic  fracturing - the process of injecting water and chemicals  into reservoirs to fracture rock and free up gas and oil. Critics say fracking can poison water supplies.  They also  say it uses large amounts of fresh water and generates large  amounts of wastewater with limited disposal options.   Hydraulic fracturing injects high volumes of water,  chemicals and particles underground to create fractures  through which gas can flow for collection.  According to the industry, fracturing has been used in  roughly 90 percent of wells in operation today and 60 to 80  percent of new wells will require fracturing to remain  viable.  The industry contends the process is safe.  But hydraulic fracturing operations have been linked to  environmental risks that could have significant financial  implications for the companies involved and are leading to  increased regulatory scrutiny.     Congress has directed the EPA to study the potential impact  of fracking on drinking water, human health and the  environment after complaints by residents were seen on the  television programme, 'Sixty Minutes'. The publicity also captured the attention of shareholder  groups, which filed proposals this year affecting a dozen  companies involved in 'fracking', in which they requested  more disclosure on risks.  The fracturing operations involve the movement, storage, and  disposal of millions of gallons of water and thousands to  tens of thousands of gallons of toxic chemicals.  But because of a lack of transparency, it can be very  difficult to learn what chemicals are used by companies.   Spills, regulatory penalties, and litigation linked to  fracturing operations in been reported in several states  where natural gas companies are active.  Response votes were  very favourable, the groups say. Of 12 proposals filed, six went to a shareholder proxy vote  and were supported by between 21 percent and 42 percent of  shareholders. 'We are pleased with the kind of votes we received at the  proxy season,' says Larisa Ruoff of Green Century Capital  Management, a Boston investment advisory firm focused on  environmentally responsible investing.  'With the resolution  that went to a vote, we're pleased with the amount of  shareholder support for a  first-year environmental proposal.  In general, most of the  votes were incredibly strong. 'Consumer and industry interest has been running so high that  the EPA was forced forced to postpone its fourth and final  hearing for security reasons. The decision came less than 24 hours after the agency  announced it was moving its hearing from Binghamton  University 65 miles north to a Syracuse, New York,  convention centre. The EPA criticised Binghamton University, saying the  university wanted to raise the amount it was charging from  6,000 to 40,000 dollars. The university said it anticipated as many as 8,000 people  and rallies by environmental groups and drilling supporters,  which would have required a switch to a bigger campus venue  and hiked insurance and security costs.  A new date and  location haven't been set. The hearing is the fourth and last by the EPA around the  country as it prepares to launch a study of hydraulic  fracturing, The hearings are intended to help shape the scope of the  study.  Previous hearings were held in Fort Worth, Texas; Denver,  Colorado; and Canonsburg, Pennsylvania.  The Pennsylvania  hearing drew more than 1,200 participants. The EPA is studying hydraulic fracturing as gas drillers  swarm to the lucrative Marcellus Shale region primarily  beneath Pennsylvania, New York, West Virginia and Ohio and  blast into other shale reserves around the country. With public input submitted in writing or at the four public  meetings, the EPA had planned to complete the study's design  by September, initiate it in January and have initial study  results available by late 2012. Investors contend that recent events make company  disclosures about the risks more important than ever.   Earlier this month, the Pennsylvania Department of  Environmental Protection (DEP) ordered EOG Resources to  suspend drilling in the state after a blowout at a company  well. According to the DEP, 'the incident presented a serious  threat to life and property. ' At EOG's annual meeting in  April, over 30 percent of the shares voted supported the  proposal. Media attention to fracturing and levels of public concern  about potential environmental impacts have skyrocketed since  2007.  In June, Sixty Minutes broadcast a story on fracking which  left the viewer largely uninformed about what chemicals were  being blasted into the ground. Then a documentary filmmaker, John Fox, took up the issue.   His film, 'Gasland', is now available on HBO.  It chronicles  the recent catastrophic BP oil spill and the environmental  effects of the energy industry's efforts to extract natural  resources.  Fox traveled the country exposing what he says  are the unsafe drilling practices of the natural gas  industry and its detrimental effects on the environment and  communities.  In communities where fracking is a common occurrence,  negative effects were common, he says - cancer rates were  abnormally high, water could actually be lit on fire, not to  mention generally unsafe drinking water, animals losing  hair, and much more. According to Fox, there are 450,000 of these gas wells  across the country, with a proposal for 100,000 more in New  York and 100,000 in Pennsylvania. Not surprisingly, the natural gas industry sees things quite  differently. America's Natural Gas Alliance, an industry lobbying group,  says the flammable water in Fox's film occurred because the  home owner's water well was drilled into a 'natural gas  pocket'. They say another damning scene in the film, in which Fox  blames natural gas drilling for a massive fish kill, was  also misplaced.  An EPA report, they claim, blames coal mine  runoff, not natural gas drilling. 