As regulators traced the U. S.  salmonella outbreak spread by  infected eggs back to the hen feed used at two Iowa farms  Thursday, many groups are pointing the blame at the factory  farm system from which the eggs — and bacteria — came. So far, over 550 million shelled eggs have been recalled  after an estimated 1,300 cases of salmonella poisoning  across 10 states. While salmonella may not be the most deadly or dangerous  bacterium out there — no deaths have so far been tied to the  current outbreak — its symptoms do include diarrhea, fever  and vomiting.  And, as food safety groups are pointing out, the speed at  which and distance across which salmonella from eggs has  spread in this outbreak are symptoms of a food system overly  reliant on concentrated, consolidated production. The contaminated feed came from Wright County Egg, owned by  Austin 'Jack' DeCoster, whose operations have come under  fire numerous times in the past for practices including the  housing of chickens in conditions that more easily allow for  the transmission of diseases. Those conditions typically mean about six birds crammed  together in a small 'battery cage,' usually about eight by  eight inches (20 cm).  The Iowa farms embroiled in the salmonella outbreak are not  nearly the only such operations.  In the U. S, 97 percent of  eggs produced are estimated to come from battery cages, and  over 60 percent of eggs worldwide. In recent years salmonella has been found in some tomatoes,  peppers, spinach and meat, but the current egg recall  illustrates a simple point that food safety advocates have  been making for years — diseases can spread much more easily  between animals crammed into tight quarters like battery  cages. In these dense concentrations of hens, if one animal gets  sick, it is much harder to contain or cure. 'These are concentrated operations where in each barn there  are about 100,000 birds.  This creates a structure in which  ambient contamination can be spread more easily,' says  Patrick Woodall, a research director at the nonprofit Food &  Water Watch. He says these massive, concentrated operations have a  'higher incidence of salmonella than places with less  density — increased density increases the risk of  contamination. 'The Humane Society of the U. S.  says that nine studies in the  last five years have found that salmonella is anywhere from  three to 50 times more likely in caged-hen facilities as  opposed to those where the hens are cage-free. Woodall says that chickens can be born with salmonella, it  can be in the feed they eat or in the environment in which  they live. In this case — though regulators have been careful to point  out that many more tests and investigations still have to be  done — the bacteria seem to have originated in the feed.  But  the fact that so many chickens are crammed into such a small  space may have allowed that salmonella bacteria to spread to  even those who may not have eaten the contaminated feed. The dense living quarters in which the chickens live can  allow bacteria like salmonella to 'cross-contaminate' more  easily, says Woodall. But it is not just the egg-laying hens that are consolidated  — it is also the production facilities.  Five states produce  half of the U. S. 's eggs, which helps explain how a problem  at a facility in one county in Iowa has made people all over  the country sick.  The salmonella-tainted eggs, for instance,  while originating from just two farms in Iowa, were  distributed by at least 36 different brands to over 14  states. RegulationIronically, the regulation that ensures the safety of these  products is far from consolidated.  As has been pointed out numerous times since the salmonella  outbreak was first acknowledged and the tainted eggs  recalled early last week, the U. S.  Food and Drug  Administration is in charge of shelled eggs — and about 80  percent of the rest of the country's food supply — while the  Agriculture Department oversees other egg products as well  as meat and poultry. The FDA lacks the authority to order a recall of products  itself.  Instead, as in this case, the agency relies on  voluntary recalls by producers. New regulations went into effect just weeks before the  salmonella outbreak — too late to stop it — that require  more testing of chickens, their feed and their eggs.  If  salmonella were found, the contaminated eggs would be  redirected to be processed into liquid or powdered form for  which they would first be pasteurised to kill the bacteria. But these new regulations, says Woodall, will continue to  rely on a combination of self-testing by companies and FDA  oversight — a combination whose success he is unsure about  seeing as 'FDA regulation has been lax in the past. 'Moreover, the new rule 'doesn't do anything to change the  structure of the operations' — the high-density environment  in which hen-laying eggs are usually kept. Food safety groups are pinning their hopes on a bill  currently languishing in the U. S.  Senate.  The U. S.  House of  Representatives passed a similar bill last year, which would  create a single federal food safety agency with the ability  to conduct mandatory inspections and shut down unsafe  facilities. The FDA itself has called for passage of the bill. But, Woodall says, 'The egg industry fought tooth-and-nail  to keep even the regulations [which went into effect just  before the egg recall] from coming out. ' Those were  originally proposed during the Bill Clinton administration,  with parts of it - such as the measure requiring eggs to be  refrigerated in order to slow bacteria growth - first  proposed in the 1980s. 