The European Union (EU) is failing to fulfil its environmental commitments in  practically all areas, from protecting biodiversity to improving air quality in the  cities, according to official studies released this month. This worrisome trend is confirmed by the European Commission, the bloc's  governing body, in its latest Environment Policy Review released on Aug.  2.  In the document the EC says although many official environmental protection  programmes have been launched and progress is evident in some areas,  'further efforts are needed, in particular (to tackle) the loss of biodiversity. 'The study states that only 17 percent of protected habitats and species have a  good conservation status.  And goes on to add: 'Grasslands, wetlands and  coastal habitats are the most vulnerable, mainly due to factors such as the  decline in traditional patterns of agriculture, pressure by tourist development,  and climate change. 'In addition, the review warns, 'The protection of soil biodiversity continues to  present a challenge.  The overexploitation of marine fisheries remains a threat  to marine ecosystems, with some 45 percent of assessed European stocks  falling outside safe biological limits. 'The EC review also confirms the warnings of other studies: 'On a global level,  loss of biodiversity has reached alarming proportions. ' The study estimates  that the global target to reduce the rate of biodiversity loss by 2010 is  unlikely to be met. These and other findings led the EU environment commissioner, Janez  Poto_nik, to urge European governments to increase their efforts on the issue.   'A number of data and trends (in environmental protection) remain worrying.  I  see a clear need. . . for further EU and national policy measures to make Europe  more resource efficient,' Poto_nik said. The review also points out that the quality of air in most European cities  continues to be 'bad'.  The exposure to particulate matter, especially ozone  and other heavy polluters such as sulphur dioxide and nitrogen dioxide,  remains high. The situation is no better in transport.  The share of road traffic went up to 77  percent in 2008 from 74 percent in 2000, while the use of railroads stagnated  during the period. The review has some words of commendation also.  In its country review, for  instance, it confirms that France will keep its 'commitment to reduce its  greenhouse emissions by 75 percent by 2050, compared to 1990 levels. '  France reduced its per capita emission to 8. 6 tons in 2006, down from 9. 2  tons in 2000, it said. 'In 2006, France's emissions were four percent lower than 1990, and so well  within its target of stabilising emissions by 2008-2012, in line with the  objectives of the Kyoto protocol,' the review stated. But another study released on Aug.  10 by the French ministry of the  environment, says the figures are wrong.  France is today emitting more  greenhouse gases per capita than it did 20 years ago, the general  commission for sustainable development, a state agency at the ministry of  the environment, pointed out.  According to their statistics, in 2007 France  emitted 439 million tons, practically the same as in 1990. These figures on emissions suggest that 'France will have enormous difficulty  in fulfilling its own commitment to reduce emissions by 20 percent by 2020,  and by 75 percent in 2050,' Grégoire Allix, environmental correspondent for  the daily newspaper Le Monde, said. Scientists say this inability to check emissions is due to the rebound effect.   This is the collective behavioural response to the introduction of new  technologies and measures aimed at reducing the consumption of energy and  resources.  Such reactions frequently offset the benefits of new technology or  measures. As the director of the French commission for sustainable development,  Michèle Pappalardo, explained, 'Technical progress has provoked a  substantial fall in emissions, both on the production and consumption sides.   But the growth in production and consumption has more than  counterbalanced such efficiency gains,' Pappalardo told IPS. According to her, France and the EU could still meet their environmental  objectives.  'But we need to establish an accurate carbon price and improve  our energy efficiency, including individual behaviour, to reduce consumption,'  Pappalardo added. Another study released this month by the Stockholm Environment Institute  and the Third World Network said the present regulations are peppered with  loopholes, allowing industrialised countries such as France to increase  emissions instead of reducing them.  The study was released in the German  city of Bonn during a UN conference to formulate new guidelines on reducing  emissions. The loopholes relate to land use and forestry credits, carbon offset credits  gained from UN schemes, as well as surplus carbon allowances accumulated  by former Soviet countries under the Kyoto protocol.  Besides, it says,  international aviation and shipping emissions are not included in the  schemes. 'Industrialised countries pledged a modest reduction in their emissions, but  these loopholes would actually allow them to increase them substantially well  into the future,' Sivan Kartha, senior scientist at the Stockholm Environment  Institute, told IPS. 'This means that rich nations need not do anything to hold emissions.  They  could accumulate huge amounts of credits and continue business as usual,'  he said.  