Feng Jun's fight against a local government and the steel  mills he believes polluted the water that killed his daughter  has cost him nearly everything.    'I hope this tragedy won't happen to anyone else ever  again,' Feng Jun said.     The tragedy for the 44-year-old former farmer, now a  landless migrant worker, was the loss of his 16-year-old  daughter Feng Yanan to leukaemia on Jun.  19, 2007.  His  second daughter, Feng Weinan, now 14, was diagnosed with  leukaemia at the same time as her sister in early 2006, but  recovered through treatment.     To cover the over 600,000 yuan (88,000 U. S.  dollars) he  spent on his daughters' medical bills, Feng sold all of his  property, his car, his motorbike, his fish ponds, his flock  of ducks, his fruit trees, his horses.  He cannot get a job  in Xiadian here in China’s north-eastern Hebei province  because people are afraid of hiring him, he said.     Feng Jun blames the girls' leukaemia on untreated  wastewater discharged from the local steel plants into the  Baoqiu River.  He says Yanan's death is the direct result of  waste the plants piped into the river just 15 metres away  from the land he once owned at Xiadian village, a poor  settlement a little under 50 kilometres south-east of  Beijing.    He has proof about the high levels of pollution, he says,  showing a stack of stamped results of official water quality  tests.  Tests taken in March 2007 by the a local  environmental bureau from his 40-metre deep well showed  arsenic levels three times higher than what the government  considers safe.  Manganese levels were four times higher.   Another test of the well in 2006 showed levels nearly the  same.     Yet the biggest difficulty for Feng Jun has been proving  the link between the cancer his daughters had and the  pollution from the plants.  While the exact causes of  leukaemia are still uncertain, numerous studies have shown  that genetic and environmental factors can increase the  risks of getting it.    In October 2008, Feng filed a lawsuit against one of the  steel plants, claiming it was directly responsible for the  death of Yanan and sought compensation to cover her medical  costs.  The case was finally opened in March 2009, and took  over a year to resolve before the Xiadian court ruled  earlier this summer that there was not enough evidence to  prove a link between Yanan’s leukaemia and pollution from  the steel plant.     Testing of the water in Xiadian is regularly done once a  year, though these are usually just surface water tests and  the steel plant is notified well ahead of time about when  the tests will occur, said Feng.  None of the surface water  tests that Feng has seen have shown abnormal levels of  arsenic of manganese, data that the court used to shoot  holes in his case.      'Environmental cases like this are difficult in China  because these plants are big contributors to local taxes, so  officials will do anything to keep those plants operating. '  said Li Jian, the lawyer who has been helping Feng with his  cases.    Yang Fuqiang, an environmental expert at World Wildlife  Fund office in Beijing, said in a recent interview that as  many as 40 percent of the cases in some courts in China are  environment-related, but that few are getting heard.  'The  judges don’t know much about the environment or how to  handle these cases,' Yang said.  'We need to increase the  capacity of local courts.  We need more environmental  lawyers. '    'The steel plants won't stop working — it's such a big  part of the local economy,' remarked Wang Weihong, Feng’s  mother.  'The local government thinks Feng Jun is right but  they don't know how to handle it. '    In Xiadian, at least 50 of the 3,300 residents have died  of various cancers over the past several years.  Privately,  people say the number of cancer deaths is closer to 70, and  they believe most of the cases can be traced back to the  polluted water.     Across China, dozens of similar rural 'cancer villages',  where acute pollution has given rise to higher rates of  cancer, have sprouted up during the past decade.  During this  period, heavy industry has increasingly moved out of the  larger cities and into the suburbs and rural areas.    Sun, a 61-year-old shopkeeper who did not want to give  her full name, said she personally knew about five people  who have died of cancer in the past few years in the  village.  'Liver cancer, stomach cancer, leukaemia,' she  said, ticking them off.  'The pollution comes from the river.   In the summer, the smell is very bad.  We can’t drink from  the local wells anymore.  We had to stop last year.  Now we  have our water piped in from the next county. '    Zuo, a 24-year-old woman working in a restaurant here,  who also did not want to disclose her full name, said  pollution had been a problem since she was a little girl,  but that it had grown more serious in recent years.   Married  for a year, she is waiting to save up money to leave the  village before having children because the pollution is so  bad.     'People who don’t have the money to leave have to stay,'  she said.  'There are three big steel plants in such a small  place.  People have just gotten used to the situation.   There’s not much hope. ' 