With its thick forest cover and abundant wildlife, the Dawna  mountain range in south-eastern Burma is coming in the way of  a flagship highway project being pushed by one of Asia’s  premier financiers of roads.    The still-to-be-built 40-kilometre stretch to go across  the mountain in military-ruled Burma is key to making the  Asian Development Bank’s (AsDB) East-West Corridor a  reality.  It is part of the Manila-based bank’s 1,450-km long  highway, billed to facilitate easier transport of goods and  services across mainland South-east Asia.    The planned road will link the already completed 18-km  road and a 200-km highway on either side of the mountain in  that corner of Burma, also known as Myanmar.  The AsDB’s  blueprint seeks to connect the Burmese port city of  Moulmein, on the Andaman Sea, with the Vietnamese city of Da  Nang, on the coast of the South China Sea.    But this short distance of asphalt will test the bank’s  commitment to keeping environmental and social costs to a  minimum in the projects that are part of the economic  integration agenda of its Greater Mekong Subregion (GMS)  Programme.    'The area they have chosen to build the road is a part of  the mountain with forests and wildlife,' said Naing Htoo,  Burma project coordinator for Earthrights International, a  U. S-based green lobby.  'It will result in increasing logging  of teak and killing wildlife. '   In addition, the ethnic Karen who live in the area where  the road will run through feat that it would make it easier  for more Burmese troops to come in to combat the Karen  National Union, a rebel force that has been waging a  separatist war for six decades.    'The Dawna mountain area has a KNU presence and bringing  in Burmese troops will result in more militarisation and  abuse,' Naing Htoo told IPS.  'There are already signs of  such violations, as land owned by locals close to the road’s  route has been confiscated. '   For now, concerns that road construction will also result  in rights violations such as forced labour, which the  Burmese regime has been accused of, appears unfounded.   'Since February 2007 some 430 (forced labour) complaints  have been received from all over the country, however no  complaints have been received alleging forced labour in  respect to the East-West corridor highway project,' Steve  Marshall, head of the International Labour Organisation’s  Burma office, told IPS.     The AsDB is taking cover behind its non-involvement in  providing direct funds to Burma to sidestep the questions  that environmentalists and human rights activists are  raising about the road across the Dawana range.  The bank has  stopped development funding in Burma for the past two  decades due to the country’s financial and political  troubles.    'ADB has not provided any direct assistance to Myanmar  for over 20 years, and ADB has no plans to provide any new  direct assistance to Myanmar,' said Pradeep Srivastava, a  senior regional cooperation specialist at the bank, in an e- mail interview.  'Since ADB does not operate in Mynamar,  questions about the East-West Economic Corridor or other  matters within the country can be best answered by officials  in Myanmar. '   Likewise, any hint of a policy change by the bank to fund  an infrastructure project in Burma would be met by  opposition from the United States and the European Union  (EU), which enjoy sufficient clout in the AsDB’s operations.    'Infrastructure development in a conflict area like the  highway project is certain to be met by strong opposition  from the U. S.  government and many EU countries,' said Yuki  Akimoto, co-director of the Tokyo-based Burma Information  Network — Japan, which monitors the work of international  financial institutions.  'It may be difficult to abide by the  ADB’s own environmental and social safeguard policies. '   'The Burma stretch is key to the realisation of the East- West Economic Corridor,' she said in an interview.  'The ADB  has been encouraging other entities to help build that  stretch.  As such, Thailand has been helping build part of  the highway and Japan has been very keen on it, too. '   The bank’s GMS programme began in 1992 to promote  economic growth in the six countries that share the Mekong  River, South-east Asia’s largest body of water.  These are  Burma, Cambodia, China, Laos, Thailand and Vietnam.    By 2005, over 10 billion U. S.  dollars worth of  investments had poured in to finance the building of roads,  bridges, airports, seaports, power lines and hotels across  this sub-region.  Loans for the transport sector from the  bank and other funders topped that amount, accounting for  nearly half, or 4. 8 billion U. S.  dollars.    But projects such as the transport corridor will have  'costs that go with the project,' said Avilash Roul,  executive director of the NGO Forum on the ADB, a Manila- based watchdog of the bank.  'Based on its studies, the ADB  admits that the road project will increase the threat of  communicable diseases such as HIV/AIDS, avian flu, human and  wildlife trafficking, and degradation of environment and  natural resources. '   'From the ground, local communities claim that they were  not consulted about the project,' he explained in an  interview, echoing a complaint that villagers in the Burma  stretch of the transport corridor have made to activists.    'Local communities were never consulted when the first  phase of the highway in Myamnar was being built and they  have not been approached for the phase across the mountain,'  said Naing Htoo.  'Workers in rubber plantations and fruit  farmers have lost their livelihoods. '  