The heat in the upper six miles of the earth’s crust contains 50,000 times as  much energy as found in all the world’s oil and gas reserves combined.  Despite  this abundance, only 10,700 megawatts of geothermal electricity generating  capacity have been harnessed worldwide. Partly because of the dominance of the oil, gas, and coal industries, which  have been providing cheap fuel by omitting the costs of climate change and  air pollution from fuel prices, relatively little has been invested in developing  the earth’s geothermal heat resources.  Over the last decade, geothermal  energy has been growing at scarcely 3 percent a year. Roughly half the world’s existing generating capacity is in the United States  and the Philippines.  Indonesia, Mexico, Italy, and Japan account for most of  the remainder.  Altogether some 24 countries now convert geothermal energy  into electricity.  El Salvador, Iceland, and the Philippines respectively get 26,  25, and 18 percent of their electricity from geothermal power plants. The potential of geothermal energy to provide electricity, to heat homes, and  to supply process heat for industry is vast.  Among the countries rich in  geothermal energy are those bordering the Pacific in the so-called Ring of  Fire, including Chile, Peru, Colombia, Mexico, the United States, Canada,  Russia, China, Japan, the Philippines, Indonesia, and Australia.  Other  geothermally rich countries include those along the Great Rift Valley of Africa,  such as Kenya and Ethiopia, and those around the Eastern Mediterranean. Beyond geothermal electrical generation, an estimated 100,000 thermal  megawatts of geothermal energy are used directly - without conversion into  electricity - to heat homes and greenhouses and as process heat in industry.   This includes, for example, the energy used in hot baths in Japan and to heat  homes in Iceland and greenhouses in Russia. An interdisciplinary team of 13 scientists and engineers assembled by the  Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) in 2006 assessed U. S.  geothermal  electrical generating potential.  Drawing on the latest technologies, including  those used by oil and gas companies in drilling and in enhanced oil recovery,  the team estimated that enhanced geothermal systems could be used to  massively develop geothermal energy.  This technology involves drilling down  to the hot rock layer, fracturing the rock and pumping water into the cracked  rock, then extracting the superheated water to drive a steam turbine.  The MIT  team notes that with this technology the U. S.  has enough geothermal energy  to meet its energy needs 2,000 times over. Though it is still costly, this technology can be used almost anywhere to  convert geothermal heat into electricity.  Australia is currently the leader in  developing pilot plants using this technology, followed by Germany and  France.  To fully realise this potential for the U. S. , the MIT team estimated that  the government would need to invest 1 billion dollars in geothermal research  and development in the years immediately ahead, roughly the cost of one  coal-fired power plant. Even before this exciting new technology is widely deployed, investors are  moving ahead with existing technologies.  For many years, U. S.  geothermal  energy was confined largely to the Geysers project north of San Francisco,  easily the world’s largest geothermal generating complex, with 850  megawatts of generating capacity. Now the U. S. , which has more than 3,000 megawatts of geothermal  generation, is experiencing a geothermal renaissance.  Some 152 power plants  under development in 13 states are expected to nearly triple U. S.  geothermal  generating capacity.  With California, Nevada, Oregon, Idaho, and Utah leading  the way, and with many new companies in the field, the stage is set for  massive U. S.  geothermal development. Indonesia, richly endowed with geothermal energy, stole the spotlight in 2008  when it announced a plan to develop 6,900 megawatts of geothermal  generating capacity.  The Philippines is also planning a number of new  projects. Among the Great Rift countries in Africa - including Tanzania, Kenya, Uganda,  Eritrea, Ethiopia, and Djibouti - Kenya is the early leader.  It now has over 100  megawatts of geothermal generating capacity and is planning 1,200 more  megawatts by 2015.  This would nearly double its current electrical generating  capacity of 1,300 megawatts from all sources. Japan, which has a total of 535 megawatts of generating capacity, was an early  leader in this field.  Now, following nearly two decades of inactivity, this  geothermally rich country - long known for its thousands of hot baths - is  again beginning to build geothermal power plants. In Europe, Germany has 5 small geothermal power plants in operation and  some 150 plants in the pipeline.  Werner Bussmann, head of the German  Geothermal Association, says, 'Geothermal sources could supply Germany’s  electricity needs 600 times over. 'Beyond geothermal power plants, geothermal (ground source) heat pumps are  now being widely used for both heating and cooling.  These take advantage of  the remarkable stability of the earth’s temperature near the surface and then  use that as a source of heat in the winter when the air temperature is low and  a source of cooling in the summer when the temperature is high.  The great  attraction of this technology is that it can provide both heating and cooling  and do so with 25-50 percent less electricity than would be needed with  conventional systems. In Germany, for example, there are now 178,000 geothermal heat pumps  operating in residential or commercial buildings.  This base is growing  steadily, as at least 25,000 new pumps are installed each year. In the direct use of geothermal heat, Iceland and France are among the  leaders. Iceland’s use of geothermal energy to heat almost 90 percent of its homes  has largely eliminated coal for this purpose.  Geothermal energy accounts for  more than one third of Iceland's total energy use. Following the two oil price hikes in the 1970s, some 70 geothermal heating  facilities were constructed in France, providing both heat and hot water for an  estimated 200,000 residences.  Other countries that have extensive  geothermally based district-heating systems include China, Japan, and  Turkey. Geothermal heat is ideal for greenhouses in northern countries.  Russia,  Hungary, Iceland, and the U. S.  are among the many countries that use it to  produce fresh vegetables in the winter.  With rising oil prices boosting fresh  produce transport costs, this practice will likely become far more common in  the years ahead. Among the 22 countries using geothermal energy for aquaculture are China,  Israel, and the U. S.  In California, for example, 15 fish farms annually produce  some 10 million pounds of tilapia, striped bass, and catfish using warm water  from underground. Hot underground water is widely used for both bathing and swimming.  Japan  has 2,800 spas, 5,500 public bathhouses, and 15,600 hotels and inns that  use geothermal hot water.  Iceland uses geothermal energy to heat 135 public  swimming pools, most of them year-round open-air pools.  Hungary heats  1,200 swimming pools with geothermal energy. If the four most populous countries located on the Pacific Ring of Fire - the  U. S. , Japan, China, and Indonesia - were to seriously invest in developing their  geothermal resources, they could easily make this a leading world energy  source. With a conservatively estimated potential in the U. S.  and Japan alone of  240,000 megawatts of generation, it is easy to envisage a world with  thousands of geothermal power plants generating some 200,000 megawatts  of electricity by 2020. For direct use of geothermal heat, the 2020 Plan B goal is 500,000 thermal  megawatts.  All together, the geothermal potential is enormous. *Lester R.  Brown is founder and president of the Earth Policy Institute.  This  article is adapted from Chapter 5, 'Stabilizing Climate: Shifting to Renewable  Energy,' in Lester R.  Brown, Plan B 4. 0: Mobilizing to Save Civilization (New  York: W. W.  Norton & Company, 2009), available on-line at  www. earthpolicy. org/index. php?/books/pb4