Aid groups and U. N.  agencies are raising the alarm over the vulnerability of  pregnant women and babies in flood ravaged Pakistan. Over the past month the unprecedented monsoon-induced floods have  affected nearly 18 million people - 1,600 lives have already been lost,  according to U. N.  estimates. 'We know that mothers are giving birth in flimsy or crowded shelters, steps  away from stagnant water and debris,' said Sonia Kush, director of emergency  preparedness and response at Save the Children.  'And we know the dangers  for newborns are extreme - the first hours and days of a child’s life in the  developing world are the riskiest, even without the added complications  posed by a disaster of this scope.  Displacement, increased impoverishment,  crowded living conditions, disease and infection are further imperilling the  lives of mothers and their newborn babies in Pakistan. 'Save the Children says that 100,000 women are due to give birth in the next  month and according to the World Health Organisation (WHO), approximately  500,000 flood-affected pregnant women are currently in their second or third  trimesters.  Nearly 500,000 newborns are expected to be born in the coming  half year. 'We must ensure the health and safety of all these women and their babies,'  U. N.  Humanitarian Coordinator for Pakistan Martin Mogwanja said.  'This  disaster has already affected almost 18 million people.  We don’t want it to  also affect half a million babies who are not born yet. 'Paul Garwood, communications officer for WHO’s Health Action in Crises  program, told IPS that the U. N.  Population Fund (UNFPA) has been particularly  active in providing reproductive health care in the relief efforts thus far.  The  U. N.  humanitarian office says that UNFPA has assisted in the safe delivery of  an estimated 5,600 babies since the floods began and have helped to  establish 36 mobile and fixed health clinics that are equipped to handle  childbirth and emergency obstetric care. 'WHO is working with other U. N.  agencies, government and NGOs to get  health facilities operational again as rapidly as possible and also support the  sending of mobile teams into affected communities to deliver primary health  care and reproductive health services,' Garwood told IPS. Khush said that Save the Children’s fixed and mobile clinics in Pakistan see  hundreds of flood-affected people seeking health care daily - including  pregnant women, new mothers and children. In addition to the establishment and restoration of health service centres,  another key means to help mothers deliver their babies safely, Garwood told  IPS, is 'having health workers - often preferably females depending on the  social settings - to support and monitor pregnant women leading up to and  during their pregnancy. 'But UNFPA says that it has encountered challenges in recruiting women health  workers, especially female gynaecologists, in the flood-affected areas.  And  according to the latest U. N.  figures, only twenty percent of the six million  dollars required for reproductive health care services has been funded thus  far.  An additional 4. 8 million dollars is needed. Anthony Lake, Executive Director of the U. N.  Children’s Fund (UNICEF), was in  Pakistan on Monday and Tuesday to visit flood-affected areas. 'We must step up our humanitarian operations to stave off a potential second  wave of disease and misery for millions of families, especially the most  vulnerable, women and children,' Lake said. Meanwhile, the U. N.  says it still needs forty helicopters to aid in the relief  efforts.  The floods have drowned bridges and roads, leaving 800,000 people  stranded in the western and southern parts of the country, according to the  U. N. ’s humanitarian office.  Helicopters remain the only way to administer aid  in certain areas. The U. N. ’s latest figures say that 600,000 square kilometres - an area larger  than England - is underwater, over 1. 2 million homes have been wiped out,  4. 8 million people are still without shelter and 4. 3 million hectares of crops  have been destroyed, threatening the country’s food security. An estimated 2. 4 million children younger than five-years-old still need food  aid, raising concerns about malnutrition, while 3. 5 million children are  threatened by the onset of water-borne diseases, Save the Children says. 'This is a child survival crisis,' said Khush.  'Dengue, malaria, diarrhoea and  other infections are sickening hundreds of thousands of people.  All of these  diseases are treatable but can be fatal - especially to children - if not  addressed. 'And as the floods continue, the number of people who need assistance has  risen to eight million since the U. N.  launched an appeal for 460 million dollars  to fund its emergency response nearly three weeks ago.  So far, over seventy  percent of this amount has been funded, but officials say the initial appeal  was underestimated as needs continue to rise.  The appeal is expected to be  revised in mid-September. 