The United Nations stands accused of marginalising water and sanitation in its  much-touted Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) aimed at improving the  lives of billions of people in the developing world. But will this shortcoming be rectified at the MDG summit of world leaders  scheduled to take place in New York, September 20-22?Anders Berntell, executive director of the Stockholm International Water  Institute (SIWI), told IPS water has definitely not yet received proper attention  in the draft outcome document to be adopted at the U. N.  summit. He pointed out that good management of water resources and provision of  drinking water and sanitation are prerequisites for fulfilling all the different  MDGs - including the reduction of extreme poverty and hunger by 50 percent  by the year 2015. 'Without water, we can never fight hunger; without toilets in schools, girls will  continue to drop out before finalising their education; and without adequate  sanitation and hygiene, diseases will continue to spread, resulting in  increasing child mortality and bad maternal health,' Berntell said. There are far too many beds in hospitals occupied with persons suffering  from water-borne diseases, he added. 'Water should therefore be recognised as one of the most important cross- cutting issues to be addressed at the summit, with the recognition that  increased financing at all levels of our society is urgently needed,' said  Berntell whose Institute will host a major weeklong international water  conference in the Swedish capital of Stockholm, Sep.  5-11. The annual World Water Week, commemorating its 20th anniversary this year,  is expected to be attended by more than 2,500 experts, practitioners,  decision-makers and business innovators, who will discuss the escalating  global water crisis. The current water crisis is bigger than the crises brought on by HIV/AIDS,  malaria, tsunamis, earthquakes 'and all the wars put together in a given year,'  warns Aaron Wolf, programme director in Water Conflict Management and  Transformation at the Oregon State University. He told a recent U. N.  news briefing that poverty alleviation is an explicit  strategy for dealing with the insecurities of the world. In that sense, water was 'an explicit security concern. 'According to the United Nations, over 800 million people worldwide have no  access to safe drinking water while a hefty 2. 5 billion people lack access to  adequate sanitation. Serena O’Sullivan, of the London-based End Water Poverty, told IPS the  international community needs to do more to meet the MDGs, and needs to do  it better - including by investing in sanitation as part of a comprehensive  approach to tackling poverty, hunger and ill-health. She said sanitation, in particular, has been absolutely neglected by the  international community and the MDG process.  'The U. N.  Summit provides a  unique opportunity to act, and End Water Poverty will be there to ensure our  messages are heard. ''We’ve worked with other global networks to produce a key policy briefing  ‘Breaking Barriers’ which calls for a new approach in tackling the MDGs,'  O’Sullivan said, adding, 'If we want to eradicate poverty, we simply can’t  ignore water and sanitation poverty. 'The evidence speaks for itself.  Poorest countries lose 5. 0 percent of their  gross domestic product (GDP) to the crisis - with people spending time  collecting water or suffering from diarrhoeal illnesses - thereby forcing them  to keep away from work and school.  It also heavily overburdens fragile health  systems. In Sub Saharan Africa, half of all hospital beds are taken up with people sick  from unclean water or unsafe sanitation. Speaking at the U. N. ’s High-Level Interactive Dialogue on Water last March,  Deputy Secretary-General Asha Rose-Migiro said 'access to clean water and  adequate sanitation are a pre-requisite for lifting people out of poverty. 'She pointed out that seven out of 10 people without improved sanitation live  in rural areas. But the number of people in urban areas without improved sanitation is  increasing as urban populations grow. 'Although 1. 3 billion people have gained access to improved sanitation since  1990,' Migiro said, 'the world is likely to miss the MDG sanitation target by a  billion people. 'The MDGs include a 50 percent reduction in extreme poverty and hunger;  universal primary education; promotion of gender equality; reduction of child  mortality by two-thirds; cutbacks in maternal mortality by three-quarters;  combating the spread of HIV/AIDS, malaria and other diseases; ensuring  environmental sustainability; and developing a North-South global  partnership for development. A summit meeting of 189 world leaders in Sep.  2000 pledged to meet all of  these goals by the year 2015. But their implementation has been thwarted by several factors, including the  global financial and food crises, the impact of climate change and the decline  in development aid by Western donors. The upcoming MDG summit meeting is expected to take stock of the  successes and failures in meeting the goals, and also find ways and means of  accelerating progress toward them in the next five years, towards the 2015  deadline. 