Campaigns featuring some of China’s biggest celebrities,  including basketball star Yao Ming and actor Jackie Chan, have  persuaded some Chinese to think twice about eating shark fin  soup.  But changing attitudes about the centuries-old delicacy,  a large contributor to decimated shark populations, continues  to be a challenge.    For many Chinese, the soup, which dates back the Ming  Dynasty, is considered a matter of wealth and prestige,  often featured at weddings and banquets.  Some also believe  shark fin has medicinal value, despite a lack of scientific  evidence.     As China’s economy has soared, so has demand for the  soup.  As a result, many of the world’s shark populations  have plummeted by as much as 90 percent in recent decades.   As many as 100 million sharks are killed each year, about 73  million of these for their fins, according to some  estimates.  Because shark meat holds little value, fishermen  often slice off fins and toss the sharks back to sea to die.     About 50 to 80 percent of all shark fins, or about 10,000  tonnes, goes through Hong Kong’s ports, with the majority of  the product destined for the Chinese mainland, and to a  lesser extent Malaysia, Taiwan, Indonesia and Thailand.  The  supply of fins from various shark species comes from  different parts of the world, including Central and South  America, Europe, the United States, Indonesia and Taiwan.    In recent years, high-profile campaigns in China have  emerged to do battle against the consumption of shark fin  soup.  Groups campaigning for a stop to eating shark fin soup  assert that the soup is a wasteful delicacy, and can in fact  be harmful to humans, because some research has shown that  high levels of arsenic, methylmercury and other harmful  substances have been found in shark fins.    In 2004, WildAid, a group that fights the trade in  illegal wildlife, opened a Beijing office and began working  via advertising and public relations campaigns to advocate  the protection of sharks.  WildAid’s most prominent anti- shark fin campaign features basketball star Yao Ming, who  was born in Shanghai and plays for the U. S.  National  Basketball Association.     The advertisements are featured on China Central  Television (CCTV), a state-owned broadcaster, and on  billboards and public screens in China’s major cities.     'When the buying stops, the killing can too,' Yao says in  the advertisements.    The WildAid campaign has had notable success.  According  to a survey commissioned by WildAid in the run up to the  2008 Olympics, 55 percent of those interviewed had seen the  campaign.  Of those, 94 percent said it had an impact; 83  percent had stopped or reduced consumption of shark fin; and  89 percent said it should be banned.    'Those kinds of figures are indicative that we are having  an impact.  But there’s a long way to go,' Steve Trent,  president of WildAid, told IPS.  'I can’t tell you that we  are saving sharks in the wild, but I can tell you that China  is increasingly aware and understanding of the problems, and  they’re willing to act. '   As a sign of growing momentum, Alibaba, China’s version  of eBay, recently banned the sale of shark fins on their  site.  In May, a dozen Hong Kong restaurants and hotels  pledged to offer shark-free options for banquets.    In one success story, a restaurant in southern Guangzhou  city spent 3,000 U. S.  dollars on a live 200-kilogramme nurse  shark and then advertised it in a local newspaper to attract  customers.  Green Eyes China, a Wenzhou-based environmental  group that works to expose animal rights abuses and  environmental damage, sent employees to pose as customers  and found that more than 70 people are already made  reservations to try the shark.    Green Eyes petitioned the restaurant to let the shark go,  while volunteers protested outside the restaurant with  placards.  The protests drew media attention and eventually,  the restaurant released the shark to Guangdong’s fishery  authorities, who found a home for it in the province’s Ocean  Park.     Despite growing public awareness, changing deeply  ingrained attitudes remains difficult.     According to a study conducted by WildAid China and the  China Wildlife Conservation Association, over one-third of  the participants surveyed in 16 Chinese cities had consumed  shark fin in the past year, while 75 percent said they were  unaware that shark fin soup was actually made of shark fins.     The trade in shark fins is also a big-money industry.     When Yao Ming said in 2006, 'I pledge to stop eating  shark fin soup and will not do so under all circumstances,'  companies from China, Hong Kong, Japan and Singapore signed  a joint letter of protest, complaining that the campaign  would negatively impact their business.     According to a CCTV programme aired in a January, a  single plant in Puqi, a town in the eastern coastal province  of Zhejiang, can process 6,000 to 7,000 tonnes of shark fins  annually, worth about 6 7. 3 million dollars.  That is about  10,000 dead sharks per plant, and Puqi alone has dozens of  processing plants.    Fang Minghe, Green Eyes China’s leader, said that the  public awareness campaigns will be ineffective without a  nationwide law to protect sharks.     'We need to conduct ethics education, tell people that  sharks face extinction and please don’t eat them,' Fang told  IPS.  'But, you know, ethics education means nothing if there  is no law.  If there’s a law, things will be different. '  