Quality of life in Eastern European cities will continue to fall unless outdated  systems of city life dominated by cars are abandoned, NGOs in the region say. At a meeting in Prague last week environmental groups from countries from  the Czech Republic, Hungary, Poland and Slovakia said city authorities were  failing to address growing traffic problems and lagging far behind the West in  approaches to what has become a serious problem in some parts of the  region.  They said that the promotion of walking and cycling as a means of transport  were being ignored and that city leaders were instead focusing on more and  more car transit infrastructure -- an approach they say will only worsen  quality of life for people in cities. Vitek Masare of the Czech NGO AutoMat told IPS: 'Unless things change the  only choice people will have is to spend most of their time going places and  using services that can only be reached by car, such as massive shopping  centres.  'Large parts of cities will be emptied and services on offer will die out  because they cannot be reached by cars.  Local authorities need to open their  eyes and take a different perspective on the future of their cities. 'Cities in Eastern Europe have fared poorly in quality of life surveys carried out  by various institutions.  Many of them have been rated poorly on ecology and  the environment. In the 2010 Mercer Quality of Living survey of more than 200 cities worldwide  the top Eastern European city was in 70th place, and in the group's separate  eco-city ranking covering criteria such as air pollution and traffic congestion,  no Eastern European city made it into the top 50.  There were 22 from Western  Europe in the list. Populations in major cities across the region, especially capitals, have boomed  in the last two decades as people have moved from rural areas for work.   Combined with growing personal wealth, this has led to a massive rise in the  number of cars on city streets.  In Sofia, the Bulgarian capital, there were 71,000 new car registrations in  1998.  The number rose to 350,000 a decade later, according to official  statistics.  Residents complain the city's streets are now constantly packed  with cars, and with a shortage of official parking space, pavements are  jammed with parked cars, often forcing people to risk walking on roads.  The situation is the same in almost every capital across the region.  Environmental groups say that poor or absent planning controls, corruption  and a lack of political will have meant that Eastern European countries have so  far put little emphasis on the environment and the principle of sustainability  in their plans for cities. Michal Krivohlavek from the AutoMat group, which promotes healthy and  environmentally sustainable living in cities, told IPS: 'Cities such as Paris,  London and Copenhagen are outdoing themselves to become the future eco- metropolises of Europe offering the best living conditions and cleanest  environment.  Cities in the Czech Republic, Poland, Slovakia and Hungary  though are instead still following outdated functionalist concepts where life is  dominated by traffic. 'He pointed to systems in place in major cities in neighbouring countries such  as the Austrian capital Vienna and the German capital Berlin where extensive  cycling lanes had been introduced and schemes and campaigns put in place to  promote bicycle use. Other cities in Western Europe have also introduced measures to limit car use,  such as London's congestion charge, bicycle rental schemes in Paris, while  park and tree-planting programmes, expanded pedestrian zones and cycle- only residential areas have been introduced in other cities.  Proposals by some groups to improve city environments with similar measures  have been welcomed by local authorities.  But those same groups say that they  are often not followed up with any practical cooperation or support. They also argue that local government budgeting for non-car transport  infrastructure is poor.  In Prague alone, claim the AutoMat group, 80 percent  of local government spending on transport infrastructure is car-related, while  of the other 20 percent only one per cent goes on projects related to bicycle  transport. Pawel Wisniewski, a Polish environmental activist who met with AutoMat and  other NGOs from across Eastern Europe in Prague, told Czech media:  'Western European cities have, in recent years, radically limited car traffic in  their centres and put an emphasis on the quality of public spaces, walking and  bicycle transport.  This has resulted in a sharp improvement of air quality,  reduction in noise and dust. 'Business has also developed because streets have come to life again and  cities are safe.  But in the former socialist bloc this isn't happening.  Cars flood  the streets and improving public spaces is not a political priority. 'In a bid to draw attention to the problems, NGOs are planning a campaign this  month which will see streets in selected parts of Prague, Budapest, Torun in  Poland, and Kosice in Slovakia, made pedestrian zones for 24 hours with  events and cycling rides. Organisers say they are expecting 50,000 people to take part and hope to  show local authorities the benefits of having fewer cars on the streets. Virag Bencze-Kovacs from the Hungarian Cycling Club which joined the NGOs  in Prague last week, said: 'When roads are not full of cars driving up and down  them or parked in them, they can serve as places to walk, for outdoor cafes,  as areas for kids to play or for markets or places for art. 'AutoMat's Masare added: 'What we want to see is local authorities considering  some alternative approaches to the ones they have taken so far. '  