Every year, more than a million Amazonian turtle eggs do not make it to the  hatching period, nor do they serve as food for humans in the Tabuleiro de  Embaubal, a series of beaches along the final stretch of Brazil's Xingú River. Thousands of turtles lay 1. 8 million eggs each year in Embaubal, in the  eastern Brazilian Amazon.  But about 70 percent are destroyed by flooding or  by the mothers themselves, which dig up sand where eggs have already been  laid, explained biologist Juarez Pezzuti, a turtle and Amazon ecology  researcher. The rigid aspects of the law that banned turtle hunting in 1967 and of another  in 1998 that established penalties for environmental crimes prevent local  people from making sustainable use of wildlife, wasting one of the country's  great riches, according to Pezzuti. Furthermore, the laws mean that millions of residents of the Amazon are  acting illegally, as they rely on hunting and fishing for food, he added. It is a national 'taboo' because the ban on handling turtle eggs follows  'bureaucratic, not scientific, criteria,' and ignores the successful experiences  in other countries like Costa Rica and Ecuador, said Pezzuti, who is a  professor at the Federal University of Pará. He noted that it is a contradictory measure: while river fish, molluscs and  crustaceans can be commercially exploited in their own habitat, he stressed  that the same is not true for turtles, yacaré caimans (of the crocodilian order)  or other wild species like the capybara, a large rodent. Making use of a portion of the turtle eggs in Embaubal and many other  locations would improve the diet of the river dwellers and would provide  another source of income, without harming the species itself because such  actions would only replace the natural destruction of the eggs that is already  occurring, Pezzuti argued in an interview with this reporter. Participatory management of turtle eggs, involving the local population itself,  offers the advantages of providing food security and environmental education,  and opens the way for greater knowledge of these reptiles, said the  researcher. It could also benefit biological diversity and improve the relationship between  the local community and environmental authorities, who are now resented  due to the repressive nature of the laws that do not take into account the  traditional way of life of those who live along the river, he said. They are rules that 'ignore the tradition and dietary habits' of the Amazon  peoples, and end up being ineffective in their application to Brazil's very  different regional realities, agreed Serguei Camargo, professor of  environmental law at the University of Amazonas State. The 1998 Law 9. 605 'on penal and administrative sanctions derived from  behaviour and activities harmful to the environment,' protects the public  administrator more than it does the environment, because the environmental  matters are treated as 'more administrative than penal' and the government is  incapable of dealing with them, said Camargo. Hunting is only tolerated as a way to prevent hunger for the hunter's family,  protecting agriculture and livestock, and eliminating harmful animals -- and  the last two cases require official authorisation. Camargo believes the solution lies in a new wildlife management law that  would establish rules for participatory and community management.  It would  not conflict with prior laws because a specific norm has more power in the  regulated activity, he explained.  The yacaré caimans, abundant in the Amazon and in Brazil's west-central  Pantanal wetlands, added heat to the debate in which ecologists defend  'legislation that is among the most advanced in the world,' and fear that any  flexibility would lead to devastating hunting, threatening many species with  extinction.  On Dec.  30, a larger black caiman, known in Brazil as the 'jacaré-açu'  (Melanosuchus niger), tore off most of biologist Deise Nishimura's right leg in  the Mamirauá Sustainable Development Reserve, on the banks of the Solimões  River, as the Amazon is known in its middle stretch. Nishimura, who studies river dolphins, survived -- miraculously.  Something  blocked her femoral artery and prevented a fatal bleed-out as she was taken  to the nearest hospital, an hour away by boat. The black caiman, killed the next day with Nishimura's leg still inside, was  four metres long.  This species, unique to the Amazon, can reach six metres,  which makes it a preferred target for hunters seeking its skin. In recent years such 'accidents' have increased, a result of the growing  number of caimans, which is causing fear among the river population, George  Rebêlo, an expert in crocodilians at the National Institute of Amazon  Research, told this reporter. Precisely in Mamirauá, a pioneer project has been in place since 2003 for  controlled exploitation of the caiman, based on a gap in Law 9. 985 (2000),  which created the National System of Nature Conservation Units. Of the hunting quota (736 caimans per year), in 2008 just 446 were taken,  and none in 2009, reported Sonia Canto, who heads the Amazonas state  government's wild animal production support agency. Because the hunting ban has been in place more than four decades -- and is  only practiced clandestinely -- the old chain of production has disappeared,  like the tannery industry, refrigerated cargo boats and the sanitary inspection  system.  'That is the biggest obstacle today,' Canto said. The jacaré-açu is no longer on the endangered species list, and its skin  fetches good prices for its size and high quality, she said.  The exploitation of  this caiman species under close management has excellent prospects if the  bottlenecks in regulation can be overcome.  Furthermore, its meat is 'healthy  and has no cholesterol,' she said. In Canto's opinion, caiman hunting should initially be limited to the  conservation areas, where it can be monitored more closely.  There are 34  such areas in Amazonas state, which allow the sustainable use of their natural  resources, she said. Balanced management maintains biodiversity and the ecosystem itself,  improves food security and provides needed additional income for the  population, according to the official. The authorities do allow raising yacaré caimans and turtles on farms.  But  those are artificial conditions, which provide little new knowledge about the  species, and they do not reduce pressure to hunt these animals because the  farms do not supply food to the river communities that hunt to survive.  *This story is part of a series of features on biodiversity by Inter Press Service  (IPS), CGIAR/Biodiversity International, International Federation of  Environmental Journalists (IFEJ), and the United Nations Environment  Programme/Convention on Biological Diversity (UNEP/CBD) -- all members of  COM+, the Alliance of Communicators for Sustainable Development  (www. complusalliance. org).  