A major weeklong international water conference opened in the  Swedish capital Monday with an ominous warning: time is  running out faster than fresh water. If the 'massive and complex challenges' facing one of the  world's most finite natural resources are not resolved soon,  the future looks grimly devastating: scarcities, pollution,  droughts, floods, desertification and diseases. Gunilla Carlsson, the Swedish minister for international  development cooperation, described the recent floods in  Pakistan as one of the major natural disasters facing that  country. 'We are deeply concerned about the situation in Pakistan,'  she said, of a country where over 60 years of infrastructure  development has been literally washed away in a water- related calamity in the flood-affected regions. She said the Swedish government has so far responded with 20  million dollars in assistance to Pakistan. Carlsson said the most affected - as in most natural  disasters - were the poor and the most vulnerable in  society.  At last count, over 1,700 have died while more than  1. 2 million homes and schools have been destroyed by the  floods, according to reports from Pakistan. Carlsson said there could be more deaths from water-borne  diseases, even as Pakistan struggles to cope with the  disaster. Speaking at the opening ceremony in a city surrounded by  water, Anders Berntell, executive director of the Stockholm  International Water Institute (SIWI), warned: 'Bad water  kills more people than HIV, malaria and wars together,  affecting the lives of families and the economic development  of many countries around the world. ''We are also increasingly seeing that ecosystems and their  services are being degraded by pollution, which will affect  all functions of society,' he added. The conference, attended by more than 2,500 key water  experts, will focus on the theme: 'Responding to Global  Changes: The Water Quality Challenge. 'This is the 20th consecutive year that SIWI is hosting its  'World Water Week' in a city described as Europe's 'first  green capital'. This year, Berntell said, weather patterns have been  increasingly erratic.  'We cannot say that any of these  individual events are effects of climate change, but the  patterns coincide with the scenarios that scientists have  predicted: snowfall, floods and severe droughts,' he noted.     He regretted that many representatives from Pakistan  couldn't attend the conference. 'We share the frustration and despair of all those affected,  and we share the concern with many over the fact that our  leaders did not resume their responsibilities (at the last  failed Climate Change conference) in Copenhagen. 'In international discussions on water, there is a tendency  to focus on the availability of water, but not quality. 'Poor water quality affects human lives and livelihoods and  the function of ecosystems in the same way as lack of  water,' Berntell said. According to the Millennium Ecosystem Assessment, he said,  freshwater ecosystems have degraded more than any other  ecosystem, including tropical rainforests. Several studies indicate that more than 40 percent of fish  species and amphibians are threatened with extinction. Polluted freshwater ends up in the oceans, causing serious  damage to many coastal areas and fisheries, thereby  constituting a major challenge to ocean and coastal resource  management. Addressing the gathering, Dr Rita Colwell, the 2010  Stockholm Water Prize Laureate, said that shortcomings in  addressing the water quality issue, coupled with climate  changes, could lead to disastrous outbreaks of water-borne  diseases such as cholera. This, in turn, is bound to affect economic and national  security. But Carlsson, the Swedish minister, also touted some of the  success stories.  She said a great deal has happened since  World Water Week was launched 20 years ago. For example, almost two billion more people have access to  safe drinking water compared with 20 years ago, and around  1. 5 billion more people have access to sanitation. The provision of safe water has actually outperformed global  population growth and given more than eight million people,  roughly the population of Sweden, access to safe water every  month for 20 years, said Carlsson. Meanwhile, the Sri Lanka-based International Water  Management Institute (IWMI) pointedly says that 'running out  of water is running out of time'. 'We are headed for a water crisis,' it warns in a new  publication authored by Colin Chartres and Samyuktha Varma,  and titled 'Out of Water' released here. As the global population is forecast to reach nine billion  by 2050, water is becoming scarcer around the world as  expanding cities, developing countries and new biofuel crops  such water in ever-greater amounts from the world's rivers  and lakes, say the authors. 