The United Nations declared 2010 the Year of Biodiversity.  But 17 years after the  Convention on Biological Diversity was adopted at the Earth Summit in Rio de  Janeiro, the issue of biopiracy is still pitching North against South. Researchers and activists have coined the term biopiracy, 'the theft of genetic  resources', to describe corporations’ practice of securing 'profitable private  monopolies by staking out patent claims on Africa’s genes, plants, and  related traditional knowledge', according to South Africa’s Centre for  Biosafety (ACB). The new international regime on access to genetic resources and benefit- sharing, first proposed in 2002, will be on the agenda at the forthcoming  10th meeting of the Convention on Biological Diversity that is taking place in  Nagoya, Japan, between Oct 18-29, 2010. The controversy is not new.  German pharmaceutical giant Bayer filed a patent  in 1995 for the manufacture of Glucobay, a drug that treats type II diabetes  and is based on a bacteria strain originating from Lake Ruiru in Kenya.  Merck, a competitor, patented an anti-fungal identified in Namibian giraffe  dung in 1996.  In 1999, Canada’s Biotech patented seeds from the ginger  family that Congolese traditional healers have been using for ages to treat  impotence.  The list goes on. According to Krystyna Swiderska, who researches biopiracy for the London- based International Institute for Environment and Development (IIED), 'the  problem is that there is no system to monitor biopiracy'.  The non-profit IIED  promotes sustainable development. 'Every now and again, NGOs (nongovernmental organisations) mount  campaigns about particular examples of biopiracy, but it is difficult to know  how often it occurs or how it affects industries such as pharmaceuticals,  herbal medicines, agro-seeds, food, or industrial processes,' she explains. The problem is not limited to Africa, but 'indigenous communities such as  those in Africa are the holders of traditional knowledge, whether about  medicine or crop varieties,' says Swiderska.  In biopiracy cases remedies, long-identified and developed by traditional  healers, are appropriated by North-based corporations that claim exclusive  rights to their use through copyrighting ingredients or processes.  Africa’s indigenous peoples have little institutional and regulatory recourse to  protect their knowledge in these cases.  In all, 192 states and the European Union have now signed the Convention on  Biological Diversity, which aims among others at ensuring fair and equitable  sharing of benefits arising from genetic resources.  Most states have also  ratified it. 'But the problem is that a lot of these resources have already been collected  and are now in gene banks or botanical gardens in the North.  Until the  commercial patent is launched, it is difficult to know what is going on,'  Swiderska points out. In its 2009 report titled 'Pirating African Heritage', the ACB documented  seven new cases of suspected biopiracy, including in African countries such  as Ethiopia and Madagascar.  Affected resources even include viruses that have been identified in the  Cameroonian Baka people’s blood and which are now 'claimed as the  exclusive intellectual property of corporations'. The damage is hard to measure, states Swiderska, but 'the financial estimates  are usually based on the size of the markets for natural products, which are  massive'. Only in very rare instances are benefit-sharing agreements reached between  traditional communities and corporations.  Most indigenous people who have  created or used such genetic resources for centuries never share in the  profits.  'African countries are therefore potentially missing out on huge benefits',  according to Swiderska. The case of the Hoodia cactus, which the San people have used as an appetite  suppressant in the Kalahari desert in South Africa for generations, is  infamous.  The marketing rights to extracts of the plant were sold to drug-maker Pfizer  to develop a weight-loss product.  After years of campaigning, a deal was  struck according to which the San would receive royalties estimated at a mere  0. 003 percent of retail sales, according to the ACB. The closest thing to a success story was the repealing of a patent on a South  African type of geranium, the pelargonium, to which a German company had  claimed exclusive copyright to develop cough medicine. 'The second part of the story should be to get the traditional knowledge of  the community recognised, to get them accepted as stakeholders,' declares  Mariam Mayet, director of the ACB.  'We need governments to force companies to sign benefit-sharing  agreements for communities to earn revenue', she adds. But Swiderska points out that, 'the problem is that the Convention (on  Biological Diversity) only requires benefit-sharing from the collection of new  genetic resources after it has come into force.  It does not apply to anything  before, and most of these collections have been done in the last 200 years.  'The system aims at protecting industrial innovation, through treaties and  conventions, but there is nothing mutually binding on traditional knowledge,'  she adds. With the 10th meeting on the Convention on Biological Diversity around the  corner, Swiderska believes the current negotiations for an international  regime on access to genetic resources and benefit-sharing should include  traditional knowledge. But industrialised countries are 'heavily opposed' to the inclusion of  traditional knowledge in the regime, signalling another uphill battle for the  South on the global terrain.  