Faced with the voracious international demand for lobsters from the Mexican  Pacific and Atlantic, fishers and environmental organisations have come together  to institute sustainable lobstering practices -- although the financial benefits  are slow in coming. The California spiny lobster (Panulirus interruptus) is a specialty of  northwestern Mexican cuisine, along the Pacific coast.  Fried or boiled, with  tortillas, rice and beans, or any number of preparations.  But mostly it is  exported, to the extent that the species has reached critical depletion. 'We had been caring for the lobster population for years, but we regulated  ourselves.  We have reason to maintain the product with some measures we  have adopted and others that have been recommended,' Jesús Camacho, of  the Regional Federation of Fishing Industry Cooperatives (FEDECOOP),  explained to Tierramérica. Based in Ensenada, a coastal city about 75 kilometres from the U. S.  border,  FEDECOOP is carrying out a sustainable fishing project on the Baja California  Peninsula, with the support of the non-governmental group Community and  Biodiversity. After a three-year process, in 2004 FEDECOOP obtained the sustainable  fishing certification from the international Marine Stewardship Council,  created in 1997 by the Worldwide Fund for Nature (WWF) and the British- Dutch transnational Unilever, one of the world's largest fish processors. The MSC blue eco-label, which is granted for five years, covers the entire  process, and is issued after monitoring the status of the lobster populations,  the degree to which their exploitation affects the ecosystem, and the  enactment of a strict management system that ensures its survival over the  long term. Lobster fishing generally utilises artisanal techniques at depths less than 20  metres.  Females reproduce once a year, and the adults head to shallow waters  in the boreal spring, returning to deeper waters in the autumn. The FEDECOOP fishers use techniques they have developed themselves,  involving a special wire and a cage to catch the lobsters, with a window that  allows the smaller ones to escape. There are at least 592 boats and 1,212 lobster fishers in the area, with some  30,000 traps.  They collect about 1,350 tonnes of spiny lobster during the  five-month fishing season.  The seafood fetches about 31 dollars per kilo. 'The blue label gives us the political recognition we didn't have before.  But so  far we haven't had the incentive for a better price for environmentally healthy  products,' complained Camacho. The association is made up of 13 cooperatives and some 1,500 fishers from  the area.  In May 2009 the re-evaluation began for renewing the certification,  with the hope of concluding the process this year.  FEDECOOP is also involved  in fishing for abalone, a prized mollusc, as well as conch and several fish  species. MSC became independent in 1999, with its main offices in London.  The  organisation grants the ecological label to sustainable fishing operations.  So  far there are 94, including one in Argentina, with another 118 under  evaluation, with one in Chile. Two other Mexican fishing projects -- tuna and sardines -- are under  evaluation by MSC in Baja California. Ninety percent of the live lobster captured by FEDECOOP is destined for the  United States, France or China, the last being the hungriest lobster market,  and one that does not require sustainable production for its lobster imports. Europe, meanwhile, wants frozen lobster, which could add value to the  product, but currently is beyond the capabilities of Mexico's Pacific coast  fishers. On Mexico's east coast, on the Yucatán Peninsula, the non-governmental  organisation Razonatura and six groups from the Federation of Fishing  Cooperatives of Quintana Roo are planning to launch a collective trademark  Chakay Langosta Arrecife Sano (Chakay Lobster Healthy Reef). The project revolves around the evaluation of the Caribbean lobster (Panulirus  argus) in the nature reserves of Banco Chinchorro and Sian Ka'an, in the state  of Quintana Roo, and the possibility of generating added value with  'designation of origin' status and fomenting direct connections between  fishers and consumers.  The annual capture is about 180 tonnes of lobster. 'Protecting the lobster doesn't mean it can't be exploited in a sustainable  way,' Razonatura biologist Kim Ley told Tierramérica. The Chakay project began in 2004 as part of the government's Programme for  Collective Biological Resources.  In addition to the cooperatives, comprising  300 marine fishing families, the National Commission for Protected Natural  Areas is participating. In Quintana Roo, lobster fishing is done with special snares, avoiding females  with eggs, and fishers do not dive or use scuba equipment, due to the many  work accidents resulting from complications related to decompression. The status of the lobster is critical along Mexico's Atlantic and Pacific coasts  due to the high demand, which drives up prices -- and income for the fishers.   As a result, Mexico and the Central American countries have imposed bans on  lobster fishing during the reproductive season. Illegal practices continue: capturing juvenile lobsters or females during the  banned period, deepwater lobster fishing, or using inappropriate fishing  techniques, like nets. However, sustainable lobstering is not impossible, as long as it is based on  scientific evidence, states a 2003 study of the California spiny lobster by  Armando Vega, of the regional fishing research centre, under the National  Fishing Institute. 'There has to be a coordinated effort involving the government, the industry,  scientists and the social sector,' said biologist Ley. In Vega's view, the main challenge is to optimise fishing using a cost-benefit  analysis and integrating the species biology and ecology with economic and  social factors. (*This story was originally published by Latin American newspapers that are  part of the Tierramérica network.  Tierramérica is a specialised news service  produced by IPS with the backing of the United Nations Development  Programme, United Nations Environment Programme and the World Bank. ) 