Depending on who one talks to, Mt Mantalingahan is either a  treasure trove of untapped minerals lying underneath the  earth’s crust, or a biodiversity hotspot that is home to some  of the worlds rarest and threatened animals.    It is both, which is why Mt Mantalingahan, some 150  kilometres south of this capital city of the Philippines’  central Palawan province, is the scene of conflict between  communities and environmental activists on one hand, and  mining companies on the other.   Palawan accounts for bulk of the country’s reserves of  nickel ore, valued at 300 billion U. S.  dollars, official  data show.  But cashing on this is easier said than done,  because it would involve compromising large areas of old- growth forests and the ecological benefits derived from  them.    Geologist Jose Antonio Socrates calls Mt Mantalingahan  'perhaps the country’s largest deposit of nickel ore', which  explains why major mining companies have stepped up plans  and others have filed for mining claims before the  regulatory agencies in the capital Manila.    But for Danny Balete, one of the country’s top mammal  scientists, Mantalingahan is 'the centre of the Philippines’  mammalian endemism and biodiversity' and home of the ‘Tau’t  Bato’ (stone people) tribe, whose number is estimated to be  down to less than 500 individuals.    Balete discovered a new species of mountain shrew in Mt  Mantalingahan, and other scientists collected new species of  plants, including a stunning white orchid with golden lip  petals.     Mantalingahan’s importance as the home to a number of  short-range endemic species, including the soft-furred  mountain rat, which had not been seen in decades, and  critically endangered species like the Palawan peacock  pheasant and the Palawan cockatoo, has also been noted by  the Alliance for Zero Extinction, an initiative of 52  multinational biodiversity organisations.    'There is so much still to learn about Mt Mantalingahan,  so much to discover not just for science but more  importantly for society who stands to benefit from this  wealth of biological resources,' Balete said, referring to  potential medicinal breakthroughs from bioprospecting.    Balete added that the 2007 survey his group did in  Mantalingahan for Conservation International underlined that  it is an 'important component of the country’s overall  biodiversity'.    In June 2009, former President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo  declared Mantalingahan a national park and classified it as  a ‘protected landscape’ covering 120,457 hectares.    Against this backdrop, the conflict between mining  interests and environmentalists is heating up — and  involving local officials, laws and communities.     Buoyed by the global demand for nickel and a government  policy to revive mining, several mining firms plan to set up  operations around Mantalingahan.  MacroAsia, the flagship of  one of the country’s most prominent business conglomerates,  is applying for local permits to operate a 25-year  government lease it got in the town of Brooke’s Point that  partly overlaps with the protected area.    Two other companies — Ipilan Nickel Mining Corp and  Lebach Mining Corp — are in earlier stages of project  development, trying to get all local endorsements needed to  proceed.    Standing in their way are civil society groups that are  challenging their every move — from securing endorsements  from communities and provincial regulatory bodies, to filing  legal action to stop mining projects.    The residents of Ipilan village who oppose mining, led by  village captain Job Lagrada, have vowed to put up a human  barricade if the government allows the projects to proceed.   They believe that mining will destroy their farms and  watersheds.    One group, the Palawan Youth Force, has embarked on a  signature campaign on the social networking site Facebook to  convince the Philippines’ new president, Benigno Aquino III,  to prevent new mining activity in the province.    A lawyers’ organisation, the Environmental Legal  Assistance Centre, has hauled to court most provincial  officials for endorsing a mining project in the Narra  municipality, in alleged violation of a special national law  protecting Palawan’s remaining old-growth forests.    One contentious issue about Mantalingahan is whether  mining should be allowed in 'core zone' areas with old- growth forests, which are protected under the Strategic  Environmental Plan (SEP) law for Palawan.  An initial review  by the Palawan Council for Sustainable Development (PCSD),  the provincial regulatory agency, showed that all except 91  hectares of the area leased to MacroAsia are 'core and  restricted zones' protected under the SEP zoning system.     But MacroAsia maintains that its legal right to utilise  its leased area has precedence over local laws, including  the proclamation of Mantalingahan as a protected area.    The former vice mayor of Brooke’s Point, Jean Feliciano,  claims that the majority of municipal officials who back the  MacroAsia project plan to change local laws and reclassify  old-growth forest areas under the local zoning plan, in  order to accommodate the mining project.  'There is now an  effort to revise the comprehensive land use plan,' Feliciano  said.     Feliciano blames MacroAsia for being behind the  'harassment' of anti-mining groups in Brooke’s Point, citing  the case of the chief village official of Ipilan who is  facing a slew of administrative cases related to his  opposition to the project.  The official, Job Lagrada, had  stopped the mining firm from conducting surveys.    In an interview, MacroAsia’s vice president for  operations, Ramon Santos, declined to comment on most of the  criticism against the company, saying 'we have formally  responded to those issues raised by the PCSD'.     He said MacroAsia is not directly involved in the move to  change the land use plan in order to accommodate its nickel  ore project.  'It is the concern of the local government  unit, which is mandated to prepare their own comprehensive  land use plan,' he said.    Santos added: 'We have a good relationship with the  community, with the local government.  We have the all the  endorsements — although, in this world you cannot please  everybody. '   But Feliciano questions the validity of the signatures  MarcoAsia got to comply with the mandatory local  requirements.  'They only got the signatures of the people  that favoured them.  Those who were against the project, they  did not bother to consult.  That’s not what social  acceptability is all about,' Feliciano pointed out.    Lagrada, who has been suspended from his duties while the  administrative complaint by Macroasia is pending, remains  firm in his anti-mining stance.  'They (mining companies)  might have bought off most officials to endorse mining, and  those people will benefit financially, while we suffer the  environmental consequences.  If this project goes ahead, we  will put up a human barricade to oppose it,' he said in  Filipino.  * This story is part of a series of features on biodiversity  by IPS, CGIAR/Bioversity International, IFEJ and UNEP/CBD,  members of Communicators for Sustainable Development (  http://www. complusalliance. org). 