Damián López, of Argentina, has been riding his bicycle the length of the  Americas for the past three years.  His mission? In addition to completing the  long journey, he wants to shine the spotlight on children who are at risk due to  violence or abandonment. 'The bicycle is a mode of transportation that is slow enough to allow you to  see everything around you, not just the landscape, but also a reality that you  wouldn't see as a tourist,' López told IPS during a stop in Buenos Aires on his  north-south trek. A professor of chemistry at the University of Mar del Plata, Argentina, he had  the experience of touring different regions of his country on his bike.  Ten  years ago he decided to take on the challenge of riding the length of the  Americas. But it wasn't until Jun.  4, 2007, that he departed Anchorage, in the  northwestern U. S.  state of Alaska, with a plan to reach the extreme south of  South America in 2009.  But circumstances forced him to extend the trip, and  nearly 39 months later, he is still on two wheels. The goal is to end the trip in Ushuaia, in Tierra del Fuego, Argentina's  southern-most province.  He is heading west from Buenos Aires, crossing the  Andes Mountains into Chile, then re-entering Argentina farther south to  reach his final destination. Fully aware that the journey would provide a range of unique experiences,  López decided to give his trip a 'social leg,' he says, and contacted the non- governmental organisation SOS Children's Villages (known as 'Aldeas  Infantiles SOS' in Spanish), dedicated to helping at-risk children. The organisation has chapters in 132 countries, with 500 permanent homes  for boys and girls who cannot rely on their parents to care for them, due to  violence or abandonment.  Along his route, the cyclist visited more than 30 of  these 'villages. 'Since its founding in Austria 60 years ago, following the Second World War  (1939-45), SOS Children's Villages has helped more than a million boys and  girls, primarily in Africa and Asia, but also in Latin America, and in  industrialised countries.  'What is interesting is that unlike a traditional children's home, this is a long- term project where the kids can live from very young until adulthood, with a  woman who looks after them and sends them to school,' he said.  He was referring to the SOS 'mother,' a woman who has received specialised  training and lives with the children full time.  The children live there with their  own biological siblings as well as their new brothers and sisters 'of the heart. 'López's idea was 'to integrate the different cultures across the Americas  through a sport like cycling, and at the same time, promote the work that the  Children's Villages are doing for kids,' he said. He admitted that 'it has not been an idyllic trip of seeing the beautiful scenery  of mountains and jungles. . .  You run into some very hard socio-economic  realities -- people living in situations of extreme poverty. 'In Central America, he recalled, in countries like Honduras, Nicaragua and El  Salvador, the journey turned dangerous because of the violence associated  with armed gangs of youths, known as 'maras. 'But what 'totally changed the trip' were the visits to the Children's Villages.  'It  was a 180-degree turn,' he said.  At some of the homes, the children  demanded that he stay longer, which ended up prolonging his journey. The route has been erratic, with changes depending on his physical state,  recommendations from locals, and must-visit sites. Although he did not carry a cellular phone or a computer, López has  maintained Internet contact, updating and sharing his route -- leading some  people along the way to welcome him with a place to stay or meals. At age 35, López says he has no other possessions beyond his bicycle and the  basic items for survival.  'I don't have a house, or a car, or a television,' he  says.  His professional career is on hold while he pursues this endeavour,  which he knows will leave him a changed man. Now, so close to his destination, and closer to returning to his hometown of  Mar del Plata, he states with conviction: 'I've pedalled 44,000 kilometres  across the Americas; I'm no longer the same. ' 