After weeks of rumours sparked by the leaking of a draft World Bank position  paper on so-called land grabs in poor countries, the international financial  institution has officially released its report on the surge in farmland purchases  and leasing which have elicited controversy for over two years. Acquisitions of vast tracts of fertile land in Africa by foreign governments and  companies eager to secure affordable food resources in highly volatile  commodity markets stirred public attention when the South Korean company  Daewoo bought more than a million hectares of farmland in the east African  island state Madagascar. The World Bank report, titled 'Rising Global Interest in Farmland.  Can It Yield  Sustainable and Equitable Benefits?' and released on Sep 8, cautions that 'an  astonishing lack of awareness of what is happening on the ground' exists --  even by the public sector institutions mandated to control this phenomenon. It estimates that 2009 saw 45 million hectares of farmland deals going  through and predicts that, 'given commodity price volatility, growing human  and environmental pressures, and worries about food security, this interest  will increase, especially in the developing world'. At the beginning of Sep 2010, riots over steep increases in the price of bread  left seven people dead and hundreds injured in Maputo, the capital of the  southern African country Mozambique, sparking fears of another food crisis  like the one that affected several African countries two years ago. That same week, the United Nations’ Food and Agriculture Organisation  announced that, 'surging wheat prices drove international food prices up five  percent (in Aug 2010) in the biggest month-on-month increase since  November 2009. ' Several huge farmland investment deals have been decried for bringing  uncertain benefits to recipient countries, and sometime for leading to  smallholders’ eviction from their land and adversely affecting local  livelihoods. The World Bank report reckons that 'one of the highest development  priorities in the world must be to improve smallholder agricultural  productivity, especially in Africa'. But the report deems that 'when done right, larger scale farming systems can  also have a place as one of many tools to promote sustainable agricultural  and rural development'.  It then proceeds to detail many conditions for these  deals to benefit developing countries. 'When assisted, family farmers have been able to compete in global markets.   Many companies have successfully collaborated with local farmers,' Lorenzo  Cotula, who researches the topic for the London-based International Institute  for Environment and Development, told IPS.  The non-profit IIED promotes  sustainable development. 'But national laws in recipient countries need to be changed and better  implemented, so local people can have more secure rights to their land,' he  cautions. The report states that farmland investments’ adverse effects on local  development are often due to the fact that host countries’ governments 'were  ill-equipped and ill-prepared to deal with the sudden influx of interest'. Indeed, many such deals have been rushed through, and several have brought  minimal revenue to public coffers.  'The fact that there appears to be  significant interest in countries with weak governance implies that the risks  associated with such investments are immense,' the report warns. Cotula concurs and adds: 'Governments must be able to regulate investment  and skilfully negotiate with investors.  Civil society should be able to  scrutinise government and investor action, and farmers’ groups should be  able to negotiate with government and investors.  'International agencies can play an important role in making these three  conditions come true,' he suggests. The World Bank report calls for global implementation of investment  principles it drafted last year with other developmental institutions such as  FAO.  But it acknowledges that the 'effectiveness of these rules depends on the  mechanisms for disclosure and enforcement that are available to assess  whether actors comply with standards, and to deal with cases where they do  not'. Such enforcements mechanisms do not yet exist, and some observers are  sceptical. 'Relying on voluntary enforcement of such principles would never work as  investors would pay no heed to them.  Many already hide behind governments  and shell companies', says Antoine Bouhey, who leads the campaign for  farmers’ rights in developing countries as organised by the nongovernmental  organisation (NGO) Peuples Solidaires in association with international NGO  ActionAid. 'What we need is constraining legislation, both in recipient countries and at  home where the investing corporations are headquartered,' he argues. 'This will take a while.  In the meantime a moratorium on these investments  should be declared in developing countries that have not reached millennium  development goal one (eradicating extreme poverty and hunger),' he adds. While the World Bank report anticipates that demand for land may be  increasing, it admonishes that, 'at the same time, scarcity of information on  what is happening encourages speculation on a large scale'. But, in a hopeful conclusion, it observes that 'these risks correspond to  equally large opportunities', as 'increased productivity and effectiveness in  the utilisation of (large areas of land currently not cultivated) could have far- reaching developmental impacts'.  