A primary topic of discussion at a weeklong international  water conference here can best be summed up in two words:  'dirty water'. Ironically, the venue for the vibrant debate - focusing  mostly on pollutants, industrial waste and human sewage - is  a city described as home for 'world class water'. And rightly so, claims Gosta Lindh, managing director of the  municipally-owned Stockholm Water Company.  Unlike people in  most other parts of the world, 'We are blessed with an  almost limitless supply of good, clean drinking water,' he  boasts. The company, which provides fresh water to some 1. 2 million  consumers, claims a functioning ecological cycle: re-use of  waste products after sewage water-treatment and the use of  sludge as agricultural fertiliser. Still, the rest of the world seems largely behind a city  which has won the first-ever 2010 European Green Capital  Award bestowed by the European Union (EU) Commission. At the 20th annual World Water Week hosted by the Stockholm  International Water Institute (SIWI) here, the discussions  revolved round the widespread devastation caused to humans  by polluted water. The theme of the conference, which concludes Friday, is:  'Responding to Global Changes: The Water Quality Challenge. 'And quality matters, says U. N.  Under-Secretary-General Achim  Steiner, executive director of the U. N.  Environment  Programme (UNEP). 'Having a glass of water does you no good,' he warns, 'if it  is dangerous to your health. 'Clarissa Brocklehurst, chief of water, sanitation and  hygiene at the U. N.  children's agency UNICEF, points out  that some 1. 8 million people, mostly children under five,  die every year from diarrhoeal diseases caused by dirty  water. If you figure the math, says UNEP, that would be one child  every 20 seconds. And over half the world's hospital beds are occupied by  patients suffering from illnesses caused by dirty water. The statistics provided by SIWI are equally staggering. Every day, an estimated two million tonnes of human waste  are disposed of in watercourses.  And 70 percent of industrial wastes in developing countries  are dumped untreated into waters where they pollute the  usable water supply. Dr.  Rita Colwell, the 2010 Stockholm Water Prize Laureate,  said  shortcomings in addressing the water quality issue,  coupled with climate changes, could lead to disastrous  outbreaks of water-borne diseases such as cholera. Infection by water-borne diseases, parasites, bacteria and  viruses causes a reduced capacity for work and daily  functions, which creates economic and social disruption and  a reduction of the capacity of a country, she added. 'Safe drinking water is absolutely critical to economic  stability, social stability and even national security,'  said Colwell, a professor at the University of Maryland and  also at Johns Hopkins University's Bloomberg School of  Health. She was honoured by SIWI for her pioneering research on the  prevention of waterborne infectious diseases, which has  helped protect millions of lives, particularly in the  developing world. In a caustic report appropriately titled 'Sick Water', the  Nairobi-based UNEP said the sheer scale of dirty water means  more people now die from contaminated and polluted water  than from all forms of violence, including war. 'Dirty water is also a key factor in the rise of de- oxygenated dead zones that have been emerging in seas and  oceans across the globe,' it warned. According to the study, released last March, more than 900  million people lack access to safe drinking water, and an  estimated 2. 6 billion lack access to basic sanitation. The report points out that transforming waste water from a  major health and environmental hazard into a clean, safe and  economically-attractive resource is emerging as a key  challenge in the 21st century. A series of solutions offered in the study includes reducing  run-off from livestock and croplands to better treatment of  human wastes.  The study also called for water recycling  systems and multi-million or multi-billion-dollar water  sewage treatment works. According to SIWI, there are two ways of preventing and  mitigating pollution. First, the 'polluter pays principle', with the polluter  being held accountable and penalised. Second, 'name and shame', which publicly singles out those  who are responsible for their ecological misdeeds. U. N.  Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon contends that for too  long, business has been seen as a culprit. The smokestacks of industry have long been known to  contaminate the atmosphere and the effluents from power  plans to spoil rivers. 'But this is a misleading picture,' he argues.  'More often  than not, business is becoming part of the solution, not the  problem. 'At World Water Week, the ITT Corporation pledged 10. 5  million dollars over a three-year period (2011-2013) to  provide one million more people worldwide with access to  safe water and sanitation. Under a programme called ITT Watermark, the company is  partnering with internationally recognised non-profits like  Water for People, Mercy Corps and China Women's Development  Foundation to bring safe water and sanitation to the  developing world. The countries that will benefit include Guatemala, Honduras,  India, China, Haiti, the Democratic Republic of Congo, Burma  (Myanmar) and Sri Lanka. 