Two weeks before the 2010 Millennium Development Goals (MDGs)  review summit at the United Nations, concerns are being raised  that gender equality is still largely divorced from efforts to  address climate change, even though women have a critical role  to play in solving - and are often most affected by — the  problem. Rebecca Pearl, a senior policy advisor for Climate Change at  Oxfam America, told IPS that the two MDGs 'are often seen in  isolation and there is little overlap with the streams of  implementation to ensure that environmental initiatives  include a gender approach'. Many organisations and scientific bodies that deal with  climate change still lack a gendered approach to their  research and ignore the different ways in which the sexes  may be affected by natural disasters, she said. 'It is important to continue building awareness that  responses to climate change must address women's and men's  different responsibilities and needs,' Pearl said.  'A  gender-sensitive approach is prerequisite to the success of  any climate intervention, and many efforts fail because the  women are left out. 'Although women are more adversely affected by natural  disasters, because of their already disadvantaged position  within many societies and because of their reliance on the  environment, they have also proven more adept at mobilising  communities in responding to disasters or motivating them in  adapting to climate change. There are a number of NGOs working on gender and climate  change, many of which collaborate under the Global Gender  and Climate Alliance (GGCA) which was launched at the U. N.   Climate Change Conference in Bali in December 2007 and now  includes 25 institutions, both United Nations and civil  society organisations. Pearl told IPS that when the GGCA was launched it set out to  accomplish a number of goals. One is to establish a global policy on gender and climate  change through the United Nations Framework Convention on  Climate Change (UNFCCC). 'The UNFCC is one of only three major multilateral  environmental agreements that does not have a strong gender  approach,' Pearl noted. The other multilateral agreements with no or little  reference to gender are the Convention on Biological  Diversity and the United Nations Convention to Combat  Desertification. The Convention on the Elimination of Discrimination Against  Women, which is legally binding, together with a number of  ECOSOC resolutions should influence the UNFCCC to take  action, Pearl told IPS. However the UNFCCC has so far ignored these mandates,  preferring to utilise the globally agreed language of the  Hyogo Framework for Action, which deals with disaster risk  reduction. An advocacy group led by Women's Environment and Development  Organisation and ENERGIA, an international network on gender  and sustainable energy, has worked to put gender on the  climate and energy agenda.  The two organisations succeeded  in making governments include more than 30 references to  gender in the text of the UNFCCC in 2009. The network of NGOs 'hopes to build awareness of the gender  dimensions of climate change'.  The International Union for  Conservation of Nature (IUCN), in collaboration with other  NGOs and U. N.  agencies, for example, created the first  training manual on gender and climate change. The manual contains a large amount of information for civil  society, UNFCCC, NGOs and U. N.  agencies on how to conduct  global and regional trainings. Lorena Aguilar, senior gender advisor for IUCN, told IPS  that 'the IUCN has been dealing with major environmental  conventions for years but decided to adopt a more structured  strategy with the UNFCCC, to underline the importance of  linking gender and climate change. 'The manual describes a number of case studies on small-scale  projects which aim to promote environmental sustainability  and simultaneously empower women. One such case is that of the Mama Watoto Group, which has  been running an afforestation programme in the Kakamenga  region in western Kenya since 1994. The project, comprised of 28 women and their families,  started when, due to soil erosion and infertility, women  were forced to collect firewood illegally from the  neighbouring National Forest reserve.  By doing so, they  exposed themselves to the risk of fines while also damaging  the surrounding area and contributing to the general  degradation of the land. The goals of the project were initially only to reduce  overexploitation of forest resources and find an alternative  source of income for the communities. However, while succeeding in achieving these aims, the  project has also empowered women by putting them in charge  of the afforestation programme, in which women plant fast- growing trees on their own land. By having a diverse source of income, women are also less at  risk of being the worst affected by future threats of  climate change, such as floods, drought and landslides. This is an example of how, by educating women in climate and  environmental matters, considerable benefits can be achieved  both in improving the lives and social status of the women  themselves and in mitigating the consequences of climate and  environmental change. 'The programmes are very well received and applauded at  community level, both by women's and men's groups,' Aguilar  told IPS, adding that 'the biggest opposition comes from  institutions and decision makers, experts on the environment  who however do not understand the social dimension of  climate change. ''Often,' Pearl said, 'women are not included in local  decision making bodies even though they may know the most  about the local seed varieties, water sources, and the  resource needs of their families and communities. ''However, any intervention, whether in the realm of  development in general or climate change specifically, has  the potential to simultaneously promote women's leadership,'  she added. 