The battle to resolve the global water crisis is being grossly  undermined by bad governance: bribery, extortion, embezzlement  and high-level corruption. 'Corruption in the water sector is a root cause and catalyst  for the global water crisis that threatens billions of lives  and exacerbates environmental degradation,' complains the  Berlin-based Water Integrity Network (WIN) founded in 2006. The water crisis, it argues, is a governance crisis with  corruption at its core. And case studies of several countries, including Indonesia,  Bolivia, Lesotho, Chile, Kazakhstan and Uganda, prove  widespread mismanagement in the water sector.  Asked whether corruption had declined or risen in the global  water sector since 2006, Hakan Tropp, chair of WIN told IPS:  'It is difficult to say whether corruption has increased or  decreased over the past years. ''We have no baseline to compare with, and the level of  transparency about investment into the water sector is far  too low,' he explained. What has been positive is that anti-corruption policies are  now more firmly on the international water development  agenda. But still, said Tropp, much remains to be done to get the  issue high up on national agendas. As WIN points out, corruption is found at every point along  the water delivery chain, including collusion or bribes over  contracts; officials turning a blind eye or enjoying  personal or political gain; and people having to pay illegal  fees to water companies for connection to a water supply. And some of the case studies by WIN indicate the degree of  widespread abuse. Tropp told IPS there has been good progress in countries  like Uganda and Bangladesh, 'but we are yet to see the  impacts on corruption'. Asked where bribery and corruption were most prevalent  regionally, he said it was difficult to say that one  continent is more corrupt than another. In systems characterised by institutional deficits, the  risks for corruption are much higher, particularly in  situations of water monopolies and the lack of basic  democratic rights, such as access to information, said  Tropp, who is also project director of the Water Governance  Facility at the Stockholm International Water Institute  (SIWI), which is hosting World Water Week in the Swedish  capital this week. On the positive side, he said, WIN has facilitated the  creation of country coalitions to build bridges and fight  corruption.  Such coalitions exist in Bangladesh and Uganda  while a number of other countries in Asia, Latin America and  Africa are expected to establish similar entities. According to WIN, the risks of corruption in development  projects 'are high and widespread'.  .   The Kecamatan Development Project (KDP) covers over 34,000  villages and has supported Indonesia's water sector through  the construction of some 7,178 clean water supply units,  2,900 sanitation units and over 7,300 irrigation systems. But this large-scale project has offered plentiful  opportunities for government officials to misuse public  funds for personal gain at a low risk. 'Dysfunctional judicial systems and ineffective oversight  institutions contribute to an overall weak accountability  system, enabling the diversion of money away from  development projects,' WIN says. The Lesotho Highlands Water Project (LHWP), described as one  of the world's largest infrastructure projects at an  estimated cost of over eight billion dollars, 'is well known  for the grand corruption trials involving several (European  and North American) multinational companies and public  officials. 'According to WIN, more than six million dollars in bribes  were exchanged to win contracts and secure tenders in the  bidding process. The Lesotho trials were described as the first of its kind  where bribery in international business transactions were  brought to light followed by prosecution in the country  impacted by the bribes. WIN has also singled out Kenya where corruption prevents  Nairobi's water from reaching millions of poor people,  forcing them to pay five to 10 times more for water from  other sources. The Network has not spared the United States either. In California, San Diego households were overcharged for  sewage treatment services, and the excess was unlawfully  used to subsidise industrial customers. And local corruption in China, says WIN, often prevents  enforcement of environmental regulations resulting in 700  million people drinking water contaminated with animal and  human waste. WIN was founded jointly by Transparency International, the  Stockholm International Water Institute (SIWI), the  International Water and Sanitation Centre, the Swedish Water  House and the World Bank's Water and Sanitation Programme -  Africa. The funding for the network comes from several donor  countries, including Germany, the Netherlands, Sweden and  Switzerland. 