What do New York City, Vienna, Quito and Rio de Janeiro have  in common? They all get their high quality drinking water  through aqueducts connected to protected areas in nearby hills  and mountains. Twenty years ago, a rapidly expanding New York City  determined it was far cheaper to protect and restore the  source of its water supply, the Catskill/Delaware forests  and wetlands, than spend six to eight billion dollars on a  water treatment plant. Cities are dependent on nature.  There are many examples of  how the ecosystem services provided by nature can provide  cost-effective solutions for local municipal services,  according to a new major study titled 'TEEB report for Local  and Regional Policy Makers' released Thursday in India,  Brazil, Belgium, Japan and South Africa. However, the study notes that few politicians and public  officials realise that factoring in the planet's multi- trillion-dollar ecosystem services into their policy-making  can help save cities and regional authorities' money while  boosting the local economy, enhancing quality of life,  securing livelihoods and generating employment. 'All economic activity and most of human well-being whether  in an urban or non-urban setting is based on a healthy,  functioning environment,' said Pavan Sukhdev, study leader  of The Economics of Ecosystems and Biodiversity (TEEB)  initiative hosted by the United Nations Environment  Programme.  'Nature's multiple and complex values have direct economic  impacts on human well-being and public spending at a local  and well as national level,' Sukhdev, a leading economist,  said in a release. In hot, drought-stricken Canberra, Australia's local  authorities enhanced urban quality of life by planting  400,000 trees.  Besides making the city greener, the trees  are expected to cool the city, reduce pollution, improve  urban air quality, and reduce energy costs for air  conditioning.  The tree planting is expected to provide an  estimated 10 million dollars a year in benefits to the city  and increase in value with time. Deforestation and low rainfall resulted in severe water  shortages in India's Hiware Bazaar during the 1970s.  Village  elders and leaders realised that better management of water  and forests was needed, and regenerated 70 ha of degraded  forests.  In less than a decade, poverty rates fell by 73  percent, the number of active water wells doubled, grass  production went up and income from agriculture increased,  according the TEEB report, which lists many other examples  from around the world. Storm surges are a major threat to communities along  northern coastal regions of Vietnam.  To protect themselves  they chose to plant and protect mangrove forests.  An  investment of 1. 1 million dollars has saved an estimated  annual 7. 3 million dollars in dyke maintenance alone. Living things - plants, animals, fish, insects and so on -  are collectively known as biodiversity.  Networks of living  things make up ecosystems that provide us with food, timber,  medicines, and fiber, and services such as flood control,  pollination, climate regulation, and nutrient cycling, as  well as nonmaterial benefits such as recreation.  Local  policy and economic decisions - log the forest, develop  coastlines, build a factory - multiplied millions of times  over the last hundred years have put our biological  infrastructure in jeopardy. 'Despite increasing worldwide conservation efforts,  biodiversity continues to decline,' said Mike Rands,  director of the Cambridge Conservation Initiative at the  University of Cambridge in England. Species are going extinct at 1,000 times their natural pace  due to human activity, recent science has documented, with  35 to 40 species vanishing each day, never to be seen again.   About 21 percent of all known mammals, 30 percent of all  known amphibians and nearly a quarter of plant species are  believed to be at risk, Rands and a variety of co-authors  note in their paper published Friday in the journal Science. This decline is largely due to unintended human actions that  result in degradation, fragmentation and destruction of  habitats, pollution, overexploitation of species, invasive  species and climate change, the 'Biodiversity Conservation:  Challenges Beyond 2010' paper notes. 'It is critical that that we begin to view biodiversity as a  global public good which provides such benefits as clean air  and fresh water,' Rands said in a release.  Human development  and poverty alleviation are impossible without healthy  functioning ecosystems, and society and governments need  take 'seriously the central role of biodiversity in human  well-being and quality of life', the paper concludes. Most importantly, understanding of the vital role of  biodiversity has to be integrated not just into policies but  also into society and individuals' day-to-day decisions,  says Rands. The TEEB report for Local and Regional Policy Makers was  created to help local officials do just that, says report  co-author Carsten Nesshöver of the Helmholtz Centre for  Environmental Research in Leipzig, Germany. 'The report aims to provide an inspiring starting point for  thinking local policy in a new way,' Nesshöver told IPS from  Lepzig. Most of the negative impacts on biodiversity and ecosystems  happen at the local level as a result of local decisions, he  said.  However, studies show it is most often far more cost- effective to protect and enhance ecosystems.  Integrating the  real value of ecosystem services into policy making can save  future costs, boost local economies, enhance local quality  of life and secure livelihoods, the report found. 'It (the report) offers a new perspective and provides a  guideline for local authorities to take a stepwise approach  on how to assess and factor nature's benefits into local  policy action,' said Nesshöver. To make the report of wider practical use, local officials  from 30 communities around the world were asked what tools  they needed to be able to use the findings in this report,  he says.  The report is freely available and includes a short  eight-page guidebook for policy makers.  There is also a  website with case studies and examples of best practices. 'Many countries like Brazil are very keen on this.  They  understand that many of their local problems could be solved  by integrating the findings of TEEB,' he said. 