As Africa continues its seemingly endless struggle for water  security, why is the beleaguered continent lagging behind Asia  and Latin America - despite commitments and declarations by  political leaders?'It is hard to generalise across a continent,' Alex  Simalabwi of the Global Water Partnership told IPS. He pointed out that progress has been made, and the African  Ministers' Council on Water has a framework programme to  implement the commitments. 'The political will is there in most countries because the  Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) have created pressure  for leaders to deliver,' said Simalabwi, lead author of a  new report titled 'Water Security for Development' released  here to coincide with World Water Week. But he said that funding is always an issue with limited  national budgets and competing priorities. According to the African Development Bank (AfDB), Africa is  in need of an estimated 30 to 50 billion dollars in  investments annually in the water sector. But the challenges to advancing water financing in Africa  are primarily low economic returns, long payback periods,  and political, regulatory and market risks, says Ali Kies,  director of AfDB's Water and Sanitation Department. The way to increase investments, he argued, is to make the  value of, and market for water more effective to investors.   This can be done by raising its economic profile among  national and donor decision makers and attracting repayable  sources of finance. Asked if there are any African countries that can be singled  out for their relatively high achievements in water and  sanitation and in MDGs, Simalabwi told IPS: 'Yes, Senegal  and South Africa have made strides.  And Ethiopia has made a  lot of progress in sanitation. 'But he said the United Nations has a more up to date list of  African countries that have made significant progress in  their MDGs, which will be the focus of a key summit meeting  of world leaders in New York Sep.  20-23. Addressing World Water Week Friday, South Africa's Minister  of Water and Environmental Affairs Buyelwa Sonjica bemoaned  the lack of infrastructure development in Africa. 'The issue in Africa today lies not in whether or not we  should build infrastructure, but rather what type of  infrastructure is most appropriate in specific cases. 'What is not in doubt, she said, 'is that we need to build,  extend or refurbish our water delivery systems. ''We need to grow our storage capacity and build dams to  attenuate floods and reduce the impact of drought.  And we  need to tap Africa's vast hydropower potential in order to  catalyse economic growth,' Sonjica said. She also urged the strengthening of African institutions  such as the African Water Facility 'that has been created to  assist in our quest to plan, design and to raise the  necessary funding and create the capacity to build  infrastructure. ' Sonjica is also president of the African  Ministers' Council on Water (AMCOW). She spoke of a joint initiative currently underway in  Southern and East Africa which aims at addressing past  mistakes in the development of major water infrastructure. The programme has developed training manuals, all of which  are being peer-reviewed to train engineers, professionals as  well as civil society in appreciating the need to be  sensitive to social and environmental concerns. The project is ready to be rolled out in both regions, she  said.  'It is our hope and desire to share and upscale it to  the other (African) regions in the near future. 'Meanwhile, the report on 'Water Security for Development'  says there has been progress in enhancing the enabling  environment for integrated water resources management (IWRM)  in 13 countries spread over four regions of sub-Saharan  Africa. IWRM is now integral part of the national development plans  in Benin, Malawi, Mali and Zambia. At the same time, water policies have been drafted and  updated in Benin, Eritrea, Swaziland and Zambia, while a new  legal framework for the administration of water resources  has been developed in Cape Verdi. While remarkable progress has been made towards water  security in 13 countries, there is considerable work to be  done among the remaining 30 sub-Saharan countries. 'To achieve a water-secure world, policies and plans for  water need to be incorporated into national and  international development processes,' the report argues. Simalabwi, the lead author of the report, says that people  in the water sector have to make convincing economic  arguments for the scaling up of investments in water  resources infrastructure. But as important as funding is, so is good governance.  He  said good governance comes with building the capacity of  local institutions.  'Funding shouldn't be used just for  putting in 'taps and toilets',' he noted. It also needs to be put into strengthening institutions so  that they have the skills to manage a nation's water  resources and to influence government policy, he added. Simalabwi said the tighter the integration of water  management planning with other development activities, the  better the outcome. 'Water is connected to everything - food, energy, health,  industry.  It's the world's lifeline.  So how it is managed in  relation to competing uses is what policy-makers have to fix  their minds on. '