The report released Wednesday by energy giant BP of its  internal investigation into the catastrophic explosion in  April of the Deepwater Horizon oil rig and the subsequent  spill from the Macondo oil well has been met with criticism by  watchdog groups who question the company's motives. 'BP is distributing the blame and deflecting responsibility  for the incident so they can justify their continued  operation in the Gulf,' Wenonah Hauter, executive director  of Food & Water Watch, told IPS. 'Rather than accept the blame and financial consequences for  its disaster, BP is continuing to point fingers at everyone  it can,' said Kieran Suckling, executive director of the  conservation group Center for Biological Diversity. Further investigation by the U. S.  Department of Justice  could lead to serious financial consequences for BP.  'BP is clearly trying to limit its financial liability by  blaming other companies and denying there was criminal  negligence,' Suckling told IPS.  'If the Department of  Justice concludes that BP was criminally negligent, its  fines under the Clean Water Act will quadruple from 1,300  dollars per barrel to 4,300 dollars.  That is more than a 10- billion-dollar difference. 'BP spokespersons were quick to emphasise that the company  did not hold sole responsibility for the explosion and the  resultant spill — the largest in the petroleum industry's  history. 'We have said from the beginning that the explosion on the  Deepwater Horizon was a shared responsibility among many  entities,' said Bob Dudley, incoming BP chief executive, in  a press release. Among those said by BP to share responsibility are  subcontractors Transocean and Haliburton, who have  questioned the report's accuracy, saying the company was  accepting insufficient accountability for its part in the  disaster. 'This is a self-serving report that attempts to conceal the  critical factor that set the stage for the Macondo incident:  BP's fatally flawed well design,' said Transocean in a  statement released in response to the report. BP's outgoing chief executive, Tim Hayward, denies that a  design flaw was to blame for the incident. 'To put it simply,' he stated in the press release, 'there  was a bad cement job and a failure of the shoe track barrier  at the bottom of the well, which let hydrocarbons from the  reservoir into the production casing.  The negative pressure  test was accepted when it should not have been, there were  failures in well control procedures and in the blow-out  preventer, and the rig's fire and gas system did not prevent  ignition. 'Environmental groups have said that those evaluating BP's  findings must take into account the company's poor overall  safety record. 'Since 2006,' said Food & Water Watch's Hauter.  'BP has been  subject to at least 142. 8 million dollars in fines and  penalties for workplace safety violations in the U. S.  alone  — including 87. 4 million dollars for allegedly failing to  implement workplace safety improvements under a settlement  after the Texas City disaster, and 50 million dollars in  criminal fines related to that disaster. 'The Texas City disaster refers to a 2005 explosion at a BP  refinery in Texas City that killed 15 workers and injured  many more. BP claims that the Deepwater Horizon investigation will lead  to improved safety standards in offshore drilling.  The  report contains 25 recommendations, focusing on better  pressure testing and emergency systems, cement testing, rig  audits and verification, improving blow-out preventers, and  increasing employee competence. Hauter believes that BP's investigation focused more on  avoiding consequences for the company than on improving  safety.  'We don't expect the recommendations to lead to  better drilling safety,' she told IPS. She is sceptical that the U. S.  government will be able to do  a much better job.  'Since the oil industry has a legacy of  writing the rules it plays by,' she told IPS, 'we don't  foresee any drastically different findings from government  investigations. ' Food & Water Watch believes that the government must take  firmer action against BP until the company can improve  safety.  The organisation today filed a lawsuit against BP in  federal court for violating a number of laws in the  operation of its Atlantis oil and gas platform. Thirty-four legislators nationally have also called for BP  Atlantis to be shut down until its safety can be proven. 'We have evidence that Atlantis is unsafe and is in danger  of creating an even worse spill than the one caused by the  Deepwater Horizon explosion,' said Hauter.  'Tony Hayward's  failure to be forthcoming when Congress questioned him about  Atlantis and BP's inconsistent statements over the last year  are an indication that they are hiding the dangerous truth  about Atlantis. '