'Orange' maize, a variety of the common cereal crop, could  improve the lives of millions of malnourished people by  providing increased vitamin A in their diet, according to a  new study released here this week. Vitamin A deficiency is endemic in many poor populations,  causing up to 500,000 children a year to go blind and  increasing the risk of other diseases and death.  Sources of  Vitamin A like meat, eggs, darkly coloured green vegetables,  and orange fruits are generally too expensive for poor  populations, especially in Sub-Saharan Africa.   	But amongst other things, maize is a major source of  everyday nutrition in the region.  People consume white maize  porridge in large amounts, sometimes eating as much as a  half kilo a day.  Conscious of this traditional preference, researchers have  bred orange maize to contain more beta-carotene, which the  human body converts into vitamin A. 	A recent study headed by Dr.  Wendy White of the Iowa State  University Department of Food Science and Human Nutrition  discovered the new vitamin A source. HarvestPlus, which supported the study, is a programme of  the Consultative Group on International Agricultural  Research (CGIAR), a World Bank-based consortium of 15  research centres worldwide devoted to enhancing agricultural  productivity, particularly in developing countries.  In the study, six healthy women were given three different  types of maize porridge, one of which was orange maize.  The  research proved that the beta-carotene from the orange maize  was converted at nearly twice the rate previously assumed  for maize.  The findings were published in The American  Journal of Clinical Nutrition earlier this week.  'This study answered a major feasibility concern for the  biofortification programme,' said White.  'Plant breeders  were quickly successful in ramping up the beta-carotene  content in the corn, but then the question was, 'Would it be  available to be absorbed and utilized by people?'''So what we've shown is the beta-carotene is bioavailable to  be converted to vitamin A in the body, and much more so than  previously expected,' White continued. In 2012, HarvestPlus intends to introduce the variety into  Zambia, where vitamin A deficiency affects over 53 percent  of the child population.  They speculate that the new crop  could account for 30 percent of the daily vitamin A required  for children two to six years old and 40 percent for women  of child-bearing age.   According to Dr.  White, HarvestPlus is already conducting a  pilot programme in Zambia to provide young children with the  biofortified, beta-carotene maize.  Though the variety is developed for northern climates right  now, Dr.  Kevin Pixley and the Zambian Agricultural Research  Institute (ZARI) are now developing the adaptations for  growth in Zambian conditions.  Once fully developed, the maize would be meant for 'growing  zones' rather than country borders, explained Bonnie  McClafferty, HarvestPlus's chief of development and  communications, in an email exchange with IPS.  Though the maize will be introduced within Zambia, she  expects the varieties produced will have large spillover  benefits for other countries in the region.  While there may be numerous health benefits to bringing  orange maize to Zambia, history has shown that introducing  new crops is not always an easy task.  A similar attempt to relieve vitamin A deficiencies came in  2000 with the development of 'golden' rice by researchers in  Switzerland.  The 100 million-dollar project was supported by  four different public funding institutions.  After much optimism on the discovery's potential impact on  malnutrition in Asia, planting of golden rice was stalled  over concerns about growing genetically modified crops.  Only  this year has one country, the Philippines, begun  cultivating the new rice strain.    	 In 1987, a study on soybeans in Nigeria by Agricultural  Research for Development in Africa (IITA) revealed that  consumer resistance to soybean consumption at the household  level arose from a lack of information on the correct  processing and cooking methods for the bean. 'Consumer communication is essential for the creation of  sustained demand for biofortified maize,' according to  HarvestPlus, which said there were two major strategies for  popularising its cultivation and consumption. 'The push strategy is supply driven and focuses on the  supply of biofortified seed.  The pull strategy is demand  oriented.  By creating effective demand, a chain for the  production and consumption of biofortified varieties is put  in place. ' Consumer research in Zambia has shown that the current  market is dominated by white maize, the preferred ingredient  for the widely consumed meal nshima.  Yellow maize has been  typically rejected because it is associated with drought and  food aid.   'If this negative perception carries over to orange maize,'  according to HarvestPlus, 'there is reason to be skeptical  that biofortified maize will find enough of a niche in Sub- Saharan Africa to be able to make an appreciable difference  in micronutrient intakes among target populations. 'But findings by HarvestPlus indicate that orange maize has a  different connotation in Zambia.  'Orange maize is considered  to have added value and is clearly distinguished from the  less desired yellow maize varieties,' explained McClafferty.   'In addition, a nutrition campaign would translate into  substantial value added for orange maize which in turn would  spur greater adoption among farmers. ' To advance on these findings, HarvestPlus hopes to promote  national and local ownership of the crop from the beginning.  'As a truly multidisciplinary approach to agri-health  interventions,HarvestPlus invests in research and  development of these varieties and does not pass costs on to  farmers or the national agricultural sector,' said  McClafferty. 