A weeklong international conference here has transmitted a  strong political message to next week's U. N.  summit meeting of  world leaders: what good is the fight against poverty, hunger,  maternal mortality and child deaths if water and sanitation  are not given the high priority they deserve?When Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon told the European Forum  last week that the number of hungry people worldwide has  risen above a billion 'for the first time ever', he also  unwittingly turned the spotlight on water. By current estimates, nearly 70 percent of water use  worldwide is for agriculture, irrigation and food crops. So, why is water given the cold shoulder on the agenda of  the Millennium Development Goals (MDG), particularly at a  time when hunger is escalating?A statement unanimously approved by over 2,500 water experts  at the conclusion Friday of the Stockholm international  water conference pointedly says: 'We urge the participants  of the high-level plenary meeting on the MDGs to recognize  fully, and act upon, the fundamental roles of water  resources, drinking water, sanitation and hygiene for  achieving the MDGs. 'The experts also said the management of water resources,  water services and sanitation are some of the most cost  efficient ways to address the MDGs. According to U. N.  estimates, over 2. 6 billion people have no  access to basic sanitation while over 800 to 900 million  people have no access to safe drinking water. Continuing to neglect water and sanitation, the statement  affirmed, 'is a recipe for disaster, and the failure of all  MDGs. 'Anders Berntell, executive director of the Stockholm  International Water Institute (SIWI), which hosted the  conference, told IPS that water has definitely not received  the priority it deserves in the outcome document or plan of  action that will be adopted at the summit next week. 'Good management of water resources and provision of  drinking water and sanitation is a prerequisite for  fulfilling all the MDGs,' including poverty, hunger,  maternal health and child mortality (which is related mostly  to water-related deaths), he added. Maude Barlow of the Canada-based Blue Planet Project told  IPS water is at the heart of everything: 'No clean water, no  food; no clean water, no health; no clean water, no schools;  no clean water, no equality of rights; no clean water, no  peace. 'Water and sanitation should be far higher on the priority  list as an essential goal without which none of the others  can be achieved, she added. The path to a water secure world is a huge part of the  answer to conflict, climate crisis, poverty and injustice,  said Barlow, who also served as a senior advisor on water to  the president of the U. N.  General Assembly two years ago. She challenged the statement in the outcome document that  there has been positive movement on the goals on water and  sanitation. 'While I acknowledge, of course, the hard work of many non- governmental organisations (NGOs) and some governments to  dealing with this crisis, the simple fact is that the U. N. 's  own agencies and others are telling a different story - one  in which the crisis is deepening all over the world,' she  said. Barlow pointed out that a recent World Bank report found  that by 2030, demand for water will outstrip supply by 40  percent. And the U. N.  Environment Programme (UNEP) says that right  now, one in three Africans do not have adequate access to  water and sanitation, but that at current rate of demand,  and in the next one to two decades, one in two Africans will  not have access at all. 'This is a direct contradiction to the statistics we are  seeing from the MDG report,' she said, adding, 'Finally, I  have long been concerned that the MDG goals do not take into  account ecosystem protection and restoration. 'Success of the goals is defined by the number of pipes built  and the number of people who technically have more access,  in spite of the fact that often this water is either not  safe or not affordable because it is beyond the price range  of much of the population. At the same time, said Barlow, very little attention is paid  to the fact that humans are pumping groundwater far faster  than it can be replenished and extracting and polluting our  rivers and lakes to death. There is not enough groundwater for all even if the MDG  goals were to succeed brilliantly, without a major new  commitment to protecting source water and rebuilding  ecosystems.  This, of course, would totally challenge the  doctrine of unlimited growth and unregulated global trade  all governments are so keen on and that is the heart of the  problem, she said. 'The MDGs on water? Too little, not focused properly, not  put in the larger context that would lead us to a more just  and sustainable world and a solution to all of the other MDG  goals as well,' Barlow declared. Meanwhile, at the Stockholm water conference last week,  Charity Ngilu, Kenya's minister for water and irrigation,  told delegates: 'We are in a situation where there is not  enough water for all uses, whether for power production,  agricultural, industrial or domestic use. 'She said access to water is a dream to millions of people in  Africa's arid and semi-arid lands who have to cover long  distances to get it.  In many instances, the source is  already compromised in terms of quality. They get water from polluted sand and surface dams, and  untreated and contaminated point sources.  The situation is  aggravated by catchment degradation due to poverty, she  pointed out. Globally, she said, fresh water resources are rapidly  diminishing.  In modern times, water pollution is on the  increase and gross quality deterioration is evident in many  water bodies. 'Water stress has led most often to conflicts at local and  regional levels.  More conflicts and tensions are likely to  arise within national borders, in the downstream areas of  distressed river basins,' she warned. 