With the Millennium Development Goals review summit just one  week away, the World Bank is the latest international player  to announce its strategy to help achieve those goals by their  2015 deadline. The new funding, totaling nearly 10 billion dollars, is  meant to help overcome what have been termed the food, fuel  and financial crises which the Bank says have added to the  obstacles faced by developing countries. Progress toward the MDGs in some countries has been stalled  or reversed in recent years, the Bank estimates, saying that  64 million more people are living in extreme poverty in 2010  as a result of these recent crises.  Progress toward MDG one  — to reduce by half both the number of people suffering from  hunger and from extreme poverty — was almost completely  reversed in 2008 as a result of the spike in food prices. These findings, included in a report accompanying the  funding announcement, echo others' findings.  The United  Nations' 2009 progress report on the MDGs, for instance,  found that due to the economic crisis in 2009 an additional  35 million people fell to extreme levels of poverty and the  number of chronically malnourished people reached one  billion. It is hoped that next week's summit will lead to concrete  and significant actions toward overcoming those setbacks —  and the uneven progress toward the MDGs that is currently  seen between the developing poor countries and the poorest  of the poor. For its part, the World Bank announced Monday it is  committing to new financing of 8. 3 billion dollars on  agriculture, 750 million dollars on education and 600  million dollars on health. This money will be provided by the institution's  International Development Association (IDA), which provides  zero-interest loans and grants to help the world's poorest  countries. The health funding will therefore be focused on 35 countries  primarily in East and South Asia and in sub-Saharan Africa,  while the education money will go mainly to sub-Saharan  Africa. Indeed, many places South Asia and sub-Saharan Africa are  very much behind much of the rest of the developing world  when it comes to reaching the health and education goals.   One in seven children born in sub-Saharan Africa died before  their fifth birthday in 2008 — accounting for half the child  deaths worldwide — while South Asia accounted for another  third of those deaths that year, according to a report  released by UNICEF last week. In terms of education, sub-Saharan Africa is again the main  laggard — only 65 percent of primary school-aged children  were in school in 2008, says UNICEF.  Even more children,  though a smaller percentage of the total primary school-aged  population, were out of school that year in South Asia. Agricultural aid key to MDGsBut the funding for agriculture could do the most good, say  experts. The World Bank itself has said that economic growth in the  agriculture sector is twice as effective at reducing poverty  than growth in other sectors'If you want to do something serious about the MDGs you have  to do something about smallholder agriculture,' Christopher  Delgado, strategy and policy adviser in the Bank's  Agriculture and Rural Development Department, told IPS.  John McArthur, CEO of Millennium Promise, an NGO committed  to helping achieve the MDGs, says that agriculture is key to  jumpstarting economic growth in developing countries. He points to recommendations by the MDG Africa Steering  Group, which brought together heads of multilateral  development organisations in 2007 to identify what steps are  needed to achieve the goals.  The group found that Africa  alone needs agricultural aid to rise to eight billion  dollars a year. The World Bank is counted on to provide only a portion of  that aid, but given that the 8. 3 billion announced Monday is  meant for the world generally, McArthur says the increase is  'still not adequate'. 'But it's not the fault of the World Bank; it's the fault of  the shareholders and financiers of the World Bank,' he told  IPS.  'The World Bank is clearly committed to the MDGs, but  it is important to stress that they are operating in a very  constrained environment since they are subject to the  commitments of their funders. ' He notes that the 8. 3 billion-dollar increase is 'consistent  with the need for increases in finance for agriculture', but  that overall the fact that the Bank is constrained by the  commitments of its funders means it is seeing 'incremental'  success for now in its efforts to help attain the MDGs.  Delgado sees agriculture and rural lending continuing to  increase in future years.  In 1980, it was 30 percent of  total Bank lending, then dipped to seven percent around the  start of this decade before rebounding to about 12 percent  now, he says. Explaining that Bank lending is dependent on countries'  request, he says those numbers reflect the fluctuating place  of agriculture among governments' priorities.  When food  prices came down in the 1990s, governments moved on to other  areas of concern, he explains, but around 2000, people began  to realise there had been underinvestment.  The food crisis  in 2007 and 2008 'crystallised' that fact for governments. 'Because of that I think you'll see continued expansion of  agriculture lending,' he says. Delgado explained that 45 percent of the 8. 3 billion dollars  announced Monday will be from IDA, meaning it will be highly  concessional — 'almost a grant'.  The remaining money will  come from the International Bank for Reconstruction and  Development (IBRD) and the International Finance Corporation  (IFC), and be split about evenly between them.  This money  comes as part of the Bank's Agriculture Action Plan. Also Monday, U. N.  Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon said that  100 billion dollars would be needed to reach the MDGs by  2015.  The world's poorest 49 countries alone would need 26  billion dollars next year. 