While the recovery from the financial and economic meltdown remains fragile in  especially the developed world, the outlook for Africa inspires optimism,  according to UNCTAD.  The agency also believes the crisis might be the death- knell for the export-led economic growth model -- especially African countries  should leave it behind. With the major industrial countries not being able to consume as much as  before, export-led growth — mainly by encouraging investment in cheap  labour-intensive industries - has no future.  Developing countries, especially in Africa, should therefore boost domestic  consumption and allow wages to increase in line with productivity growth,  according to UNCTAD (United Nations Conference on Trade and  Development).  The findings are contained in the agency’s Trade and Development Report  2010, entitled 'Employment, Globalisation and Development, which went  public on Sep 14.  Export-led growth prescriptions are associated with the  neoliberal capitalist Washington Consensus. The global economic and financial crisis has marked the end of the model of  export-led growth for everybody, since 'there must be somebody who  imports and somebody who exports', Dr.  Supachai Panitchpakdi, UNCTAD  secretary general, stated at the presentation of the report in Geneva.  Now that the debt-financed consumption boom in the U. S.  has ended, the  U. S.  economy will no longer serve as an engine of growth for the global  economy.  China, the euro area and Japan are unlikely to assume that role in  the near future.   'Domestic demand in China is only one-eighth of that in the U. S. ,'  Panitchpakdi continued.  'Therefore, even if the Chinese economy tries to increase domestic spending,  it cannot compensate for the loss of demand from the U. S.  We advice  developing countries to stay away from total export-led growth involving  compressing domestic wages, because this will lead to less demand  domestically and less employment creation. 'It has been demonstrated that keeping wages low is not correlated with  employment creation, Panitchpakdi argued.  'We have to look at wages and  income as a source of demand and with the lifting of wages, in line with  productivity growth, demand could increase and lead to more investment. 'To the question of how wages can be increased in a global environment  where multinational companies pull out of countries and reinvest in others  with more docile labour laws and lower wages, the response is that 'it  depends on a country’s economic policy strategy', declared Dr.  Heiner  Flassbeck, director of the UNCTAD division for globalisation and development  strategies.  'If you believe that a flexible labour market is the best thing in the world, you  will not strive to create institutions that could stabilise domestic demand.   This has been the paradigm of the last 20 to 30 years and that is why such  institutions do not exist. 'There is a need for a paradigm shift, Flassbeck said, and UNCTAD, together  with the financial institution the International Monetary Fund, should be able  to convince governments about the need of establishing tripartite agreements  to discuss national strategies.  'This is a totally different approach for many  countries, in particular for developing ones', he added.   Tripartite agreements involve the government, capital and trade unions. The International Labour Organisation has cautioned against the fragility of  the global economic recovery, since jobs have been created mainly in the  informal sector.  UNCTAD believes that sustainable policies for wage increases need to cover  both formal and informal labour markets and there needs to be a linkage  between the two of them.  An example would be guarantees on farming  income as established by some countries.   This is particularly true for Africa, where 'more than 20 years of orthodox  macroeconomic policies have had limited success in creating the conditions  necessary for rapid and sustainable growth', the report states. By the end of the 1990s, according to the report, Africa’s 'production  structure was reminiscent of the colonial period, consisting overwhelmingly  of agriculture and mining'. There is not a shortage of employment in absolute terms in African countries,  but a lack of productive and decent jobs, states the report.  Agriculture still  absorbs more than 60 percent of the labour force and there has been a rise  in employment, mainly informal, in urban services and small-scale  commerce.  Formal wage jobs account for only 13 percent of employment and 60 percent  of the employed are working poor.  Panitchpakdi pointed out that, 'today, as shown by the recently released  UNCTAD World Investment Report 2010, we are seeing an emergence of a  different kind of investment policy, a mix between liberalising measures and  more rules and regulations, particularly in developing countries. ' Governments understand that investment left to its own devices could lead to  dislocation of industries.  Thus states are starting to again guide direct  investment to specific geographic, social and economic areas.  China, for  example, is reorienting its investment policy from cheap labour-based to  technology-based industries.  'UNCTAD is concerned with fragile and uneven recovery, Panitchpakdi stated.   'There is a real risk for some governments if they withdraw their support for  the recovery too early.  The pressure put on some countries, particularly  industrialised ones, to try and balance their budget so early could dampen  earlier stimulus measures and lead to weak growth. 'But Flassbeck added that UNCTAD is 'optimistic about Africa.  The continent  has not experienced such a dramatic drop in production in 2009 and we have  seen a rebound of growth in many countries.  In our view, Africa could have a  continuation of 4,5 percent GDP (gross domestic product) growth in 2010. '  