The Mexican government's subsidies for corn (maize) production since 1994  have benefitted large- and medium-scale growers, to the detriment of small  farmers, according to a new study by Mexican and U. S.  researchers. The report published this week, 'Subsidising Inequality: Mexico's Corn Policy  Since NAFTA,' was a collaborative effort by experts from Mexico's private  Centre for Economic Research and Teaching (CIDE), and the U. S.  Woodrow  Wilson Centre for International Scholars and the University of California in  Santa Cruz. 'We don't know for certain whether the subsidies have reached those  intended, or whether they have been used for the purposes for which they  were designed,' said Mauricio Merino, a CIDE researcher and one of the  contributors to the 193-page report released in Mexico, and sponsored by  the U. S. -based William and Flora Hewlett Foundation. The study focuses on the government programmes Procampo, which is direct  farm subsidies; ASERCA, support and services for agricultural marketing and  trade; and the Farm Alliance (Alianza para el Campo), launched since 1994,  when the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) entered into force. In that period, the Mexican government has spent more than 20 billion dollars  in direct aid to maize growers, particularly in the northern states along the  U. S.  border. Maize, a staple in the Mexican diet, played a strong role in pre-Hispanic  cultures, and remains an emblematic crop in the Mesoamerican region, which  extends from Mexico through Central America. According to John Scott, a researcher from the University of California and one  of the contributors to the study, some of the subsidies are so aggressive that  they actually increase inequality.  He pointed to the contradiction that even  though there are subsidies for social programmes, the farm subsidies can  nullify their effects. Government figures show that Mexico has some 3. 2 million maize growers, of  which more than 2 million grow the crop for their own consumption.  National  production was 24 million tonnes in 2009, and this year is expected to reach  26 million, according to Mexico's National Confederation of Maize Producers. The farmers here mostly grow white maize for human consumption, and  import yellow maize for animal feed.  In 2010, those imports will total an  estimated 9 million tonnes. Once NAFTA (signed by Canada, United States and Mexico) took effect,  Mexico created a series of financial mechanisms to compensate its farmers as  they faced the new trade liberalisation.  One of those, Procampo, reached 2. 5  million farmers. According to 'Subsidising Inequality,' Procampo, with a current budget of  about 1. 25 billion dollars and whose mission has been extended to 2012,  excludes most of its target population and is slanted to favour wealthier  producers. The bias in favour of large and medium producers is even more present in  most of Mexico's other agricultural subsidy programmes, states the text. From 1994 to 2009, Procampo spent more than 13. 3 billion dollars, according  to the Subsidies to Farming in Mexico project, of the non-governmental  research centre, Fundar. As trade liberalisation increased, especially following the Uruguay Round of  trade negotiations (1986-1994) that led to the creation of the World Trade  Organisation, Mexico had to eliminate its support mechanisms for farmers,  such as guaranteed pricing. 'Before liberalisation, the subsidies were concentrated in the areas of highest  productivity,' Gustavo Gordillo told IPS.  He served as Mexico's undersecretary  for Agriculture from 1988 to 1994, the period when NAFTA negotiations took  place. Something is also awry among the subsidies the government gives sectors  such as water, electricity and gasoline, which share some of the negative traits  of farm subsidies: they're unfocused and inefficient. Who receives the subsidies and how much? The report notes that while the  leading maize subsidy programmes appear to be quite transparent, in  practice they are lacking in both transparency and accounting. In this sense, Procampo is the most advanced, although its list of beneficiaries  has not been updated as often as it should, while the state programmes are  more opaque.  For example, Merino filed a complaint more than a year ago  with the government agency in charge of auditing the system, saying  resources were going to public officials. Study coordinator Libby Haight, of the University of California, said there is  evidence that the funds have been diverted -- adding that she wonders about  the true costs of this lack of transparency. While federal farm spending has grown significantly since 2001, employment  in the sector has fallen, according to the report.  From 1991 to 2007, the  number of agricultural jobs in Mexico dropped from 10. 7 million to 8. 6  million. In Scott's opinion, social security programmes are needed for subsistence  farmers in order to provide a different set of services to a sector that is quite  different from the large-scale farm operations. 'There is a basic problem, and that is what type of countryside are we  visualising? There have to be differentiated policies,' agreed former  agricultural official Gordillo, who also once served as the Latin American and  Caribbean director of the United Nations Food and Agriculture Organisation. Mexican farmers face an additional threat: genetically modified maize.  The  Agriculture Secretariat (ministry) has already issued 24 permits for  experimental cultivation of GM corn, which has come under fire from  environmental groups and traditional maize farmers associations.  