Local fishers objected to the creation of a new no-fishing  marine protected area off the coast of Belize in 1996.  Today  they are benefiting from the bounty of fish spilling out of  the Laughing Bird Caye National Park.  Tourism has also boomed,  illustrating the multiple benefits and value of marine  protected areas, according to a new series of reports released  Wednesday by Conservation International (CI). 'The ocean is in crisis but we can't see it with our own  eyes so we're not aware of what is happening,' said Leah  Bunce Karrer, co-author and director of the Marine  Management Area Science Programme at CI. 'Marine managed areas offer a solution which could  significantly reduce ocean degradation while benefiting  local communities,' Karrer told IPS. One third of all species of sharks, rays and reef-building  corals are facing extinction.  'Most people don't realise  that,' said Gregory Stone, chief ocean scientist at CI. 'As species disappear, entire ecosystems are altered in  negative ways we don't even want to imagine,' Stone said. Only a fraction of one percent of the world's oceans are  effectively protected even though there is growing  scientific consensus of the need to protect at least 20  percent of the seas. In an effort to show that protecting parts of the ocean  makes social, economic and ecological sense, CI looked at  studies from 23 countries mainly in the developing world and  found that Marine Managed Areas result in more fish and  improved livelihoods, said Karrer. Marine Managed Areas (MMAs) are defined as multi-use ocean  zones encompassing smaller areas, including no-take fishing  zones, areas with activity restrictions or areas dedicated  to specific uses like ecotourism, commercial fishing, or  recreation. MMAs for coastal reefs and mangroves provide coastal  communities with protection against storms.  They also play  an important role in climate regulation since mangroves and  sea grasses soak up large volumes of excess carbon dioxide  from the atmosphere, Karrer said. However, any suggestion of fishery closures or restrictions  is invariably met with hostility and resistance, in part due  to a mistaken belief in the endless bounty of the seas and  the perception that restrictions simply mean someone else  will get the fish.  Those attitudes have led to the current  situation where overfishing is emptying the oceans and  destroying marine ecosystems - killing the goose that lays  the golden eggs. Properly managed fisheries could have prevented  malnourishment of nearly 20 million people in poorer  countries and generated up to 36 billion dollars more in  landed value alone, according to a new series of economic  studies compiled over the last three years and published in  a special issue of the Journal of Bioeconomics this week. These estimates reflect the decades-old reality that  overfishing results in a death spiral of fewer and fewer  fish.  To offer a new perspective, lead economist Rashid  Sumaila at the University of British Columbia's Fisheries  Centre and colleagues decided to find out what the potential  maximum sustainable yield of the oceans might be. 'We wanted to know if there was proper global fisheries  management what could be caught,' Sumaila said in an  interview.  Researchers looked at the global fish catch for  the year 2000 and calculated that without overfishing, 20  million undernourished people could have received the vital  protein they needed. They also determined that global wild-caught fisheries  currently contribute 225-240 billion dollars per year to the  worldwide economy.  This is the first comprehensive  assessment of the economic impact of ocean fisheries and  represents an amount that's about three times higher than  the landed value, he said. Recreational use of ocean ecosystems by sport divers, whale  watchers and recreational fishermen contributes 47 billion  dollars each year to national economies worldwide and  generates nearly 1. 1 million jobs.  These relatively low- impact activities are the fastest growing.  For example,  whale watching tourism has grown 10 percent annually in  recent years. 'Whether you are looking at fish as a financial resource or  a source of protein, our research shows that the benefits of  healthy, robust fisheries have enormous value far beyond the  fishing dock,' he said. Governments hand out some 27 billion dollars in fishing  subsidies every year and the majority of these - 16 billion  dollars - lead directly to overfishing, the studies found. 'These subsidies are bad for the fish stocks, bad for the  economy, bad for food security and bad for the fishing  business in the long run,' said Sumaila. However, that does mean there is money in the system that  could be turned around to properly manage sustainable  fisheries.  Maintaining healthy fisheries makes good economic  sense but overfishing is 'simply bad business', he said. Local communities are the ones who benefit most from  properly managing their coastal marine resources, scientists  at CI found in their studies that focused on Belize, Brazil,  Fiji, Panama and Ecuador.  According to one study, 90 percent  of residents of 12 coastal villages in Fiji's four Marine  Managed Areas reported that the MMA also served to protect  their traditional livelihood and cultural heritage. Locally managed MMAs are the best form of management if  communities are fully committed, says Karrer. Among the other findings is that MMAs can help depleted  fisheries and degraded ecosystems rebound.  The Phoenix and  Line Islands in the remote Pacific suffered severe coral  bleaching in 1997-98.  Scientists discovered that the islands  that were better protected created an environment which  allowed coral reefs to regenerate 'with extraordinary  vigour', according to the report. 'So the message for coastal communities is this: if you want  access to these resources tomorrow, you have to take care of  your backyard today,' said CI's Gregory Stone. 