Genetically modified ‘terminator’ mosquitoes are the latest  weapons that the Malaysian government wants to use against the  deadly dengue fever, but activists and environmentalists say  the public health risks of introducing a new ‘artificial’  strain of mosquito are far too high.    The government has discussed plans to release in December  male ‘terminator’ mosquitoes with ‘killer’ genes that would  lead to a reduction in the population of the Aedes mosquito,  which carries and transmits the dengue virus to humans.     Under what would be a pilot project devised by British  and Malaysian scientists, the genetically engineered male  Aedes mosquitoes would pass on — when they mate with the  wild female of the species — lethal genes that would kill  the larvae of the female.    This is supposed to lead to an eventual fall in the  number of dengue-carrying mosquitoes, especially the females  that are the ones that transmit the dengue virus.    'There are more safe and benign ways to fight dengue' than  introducing an altered species whose impact on the  environment is unknown, argues Mohamed Idris, president of  the Consumers Association of Penang, which campaigns to  protect the environment and public health.     'There are alternatives like biological controls to check  mosquito population to curb the spread of dengue  infections,' Idris said in an interview.  For instance, plant  extracts, oils and biological larvicides to control mosquito  population are cheaper, safer and as effective, he said.    'Releasing genetically modified (GM) mosquitoes from the  laboratories into the wild has potential for grave  consequences,' Idris added, echoing public concern over the  joint undertaking of Malaysia’s Institute of Medical  Research and British biotechnology company Oxitec Ltd.    Gurmit Singh, chairman of the non-government Centre for  Environment, Technology and Development, warned: 'Once you  release these GM mosquitoes into the environment, you have  no control and it can create more problems than solving  them. '   Strong sentiments against the field release of GM  mosquitoes abound as well in online chatrooms and other  social media, where discussions have been uninhibited  compared to the government-controlled mainstream media in  the country.    'It (the experiment) could unleash a Pandora’s box.  It  can go out of control.  Laboratory conditions cannot be  supplanted in the wild,' said a popular commentator known in  the online community as ‘Flyer168’.  'Can the government  guarantee the safety of its citizens?'   Health Minister Liow Tiong Lai announced earlier in  September that the experiment with GM mosquitoes at the  'clinical level' was 'very successful. ' But he said the  government was awaiting independent reports from the Genetic  Modification Advisory Committee and the National Biosafety  Board before deciding on the field release of the  ‘terminator’ mosquitoes.    'If both the committee and the board approve the project,  the final decision would be made by the Cabinet,' Liow told  ‘The Star’ newspaper on Sep.  10.  The ministry, which is  overseeing the project, has 'very stringent' measures to  ensure public safety, he assured.    If the feedback from the two agencies is favourable, the  GM mosquitoes could be released in a remote area of central  Pahang state, health ministry sources said.     Dengue fever is commonly found in the tropics and can  cause deaths after people are bitten by female Aedes  mosquitoes, usually during the daytime.  Dengue cases are  often mistaken for the usual fever, and failure to diagnose  and treat on time can lead to dengue shock syndrome, which  causes death.    Public campaigns in many Asian countries call on  residents to avoid letting stagnant water accumulate and to  identify early symptoms of dengue fever.    The World Health Organisation (WHO), which has identified  dengue as a major international public health concern,  estimates that there are 50 million dengue infection cases  annually, resulting in about 22,000 deaths, mostly children.     In March, U. S.  National Academy of Sciences (NAS)  published a study that suggested GM mosquitoes could help  fight dengue fever.  Although the Malaysian health ministry  has vouched for the benefits of the GM mosquito project and  cited international studies like those of the NAS, doubts  have persisted among locals in past attempts to introduce  the mosquitoes.    For instance, an initial plan in December 2009 to release  the GM mosquitoes in Pulau Ketam island off the port city of  Port Klang, 30 kilometres south of the capital, was aborted  because of strong opposition from the 30,000 islanders,  mostly fishers.    Together with local politicians and activists, they  organised protests and wrote to the health ministry, asking  it to avoid using the island as a laboratory to test the  effectiveness of the GM mosquitoes.    'We strongly oppose this experiment,' said villager Liew  Kam in a letter to the Health Ministry in October 2009.   'This experiment could expose us and our children to bigger  risks. '  Liew complained that the islanders were not  informed of field trials beforehand, much less consulted  about their participation in them.    Pulau Ketam councillor Tee Boon Hock said field trials  were called off soon after the islanders began their  protests and threatened to vote for the opposition if the  administration persisted with the experiment.  