In the evening the lowering clouds burst.  Through the night  they loosed their torrents on the southeastern coast of Haiti. The next morning, the water of the Felse River is at the  bumper of an SUV fording it.  Another metre and the engine  would be submerged. Just two years ago, the riverbed was only 10 metres wide.   Then four hurricanes hit the area in 2008.  Now the flood  plain spans 300 metres of stone and gravel.  Countless tonnes  of rocky debris from the mountains rising sharply above the  coast have sluiced down to ream out this valley and spread a  fan of siltation out into the turquoise Caribbean. The Felse crossing is on the main route out of the town of  Marigot, east of the small city of Jacmel.  On the other  side, the gravel road takes a sharp turn north and heads up  into forested hills.  Quickly it becomes more stream bed than  road, cutting down to bedrock as it writhes up steep slopes. For Frisnel Désir, a young Haitian agronomist, this is often  the morning commute.  Désir works for the Food and  Agriculture Organisation of the United Nations.  His mission  is to coordinate efforts of local communities and  governments to help farm families coax a better livelihood  from their land and water. The Jan.  12 earthquake struck mainly Port-au-Prince, Haiti's  capital, and surrounding areas.  Although Jacmel also was hit  hard, there was little damage in Marigot.  But farmers' urban  markets and distribution systems were devastated. All over Haiti for many decades, however, the countryside  has suffered a series of rolling calamities.  Damaging  agricultural practices, most recently cutting down trees to  make charcoal for cooking fuel, have left only an estimated  3. 8 percent of the land forested.  Lack of equipment, credit  and roads has crippled small farmers.  Hurricanes, floods,  landslides and erosion, like that seen along the Felse, have  washed away fertile soil and decimated rural infrastructure. Serious damage has been inflicted as well by economic  disasters.  Former president Bill Clinton recently apologised  before the U. S.  Senate for the destruction of the  livelihoods of Haitian rice farmers by policies imposed by  Washington and international financial institutions, but  many of these continue.  Domestic politics has treated the  countryside no better, with at best neglect and at worst  brutal repression by a half-century of dictatorships,  interspersed in the past two decades with weak elected  governments. Today, while over two-thirds of Haitians still live in rural  areas, well under one-third of the country's output is  produced there.  Around one million small farm families  scratch out a bare subsistence on miniscule plots of  depleted soil.  Over 80 percent earn less than two dollars a  day. This morning, though, far up the rocky track into the  mountains, Désir is clambering down the rough stone walls of  a project designed to reverse some of the processes that  ravage the Felse Valley. With technical and financial support from the FAO, local  communities are building a system of erosion controls  extending five kilometres up this steep valley.  A series of  terraces, contained by hand-built stone walls and backfilled  with earth, catches rainwater and reduces erosion. Each terrace creates a new strip of arable land 10 metres or  more wide, where corn, beans, sugar cane and other crops are  planted among the pre-existing trees.  More seedlings are  being grown in the project nursery for planting on the  reclaimed land.  Participants have also built stone  irrigation canals to channel rainwater into their fields,  all with hand tools and manual labour. Looking down the steep ravine, Désir recalls: 'Before, this  hillside wasn't arable.  So we organised local people to  build these terraces.  Then we gave people bean and corn  starts to plant on them.  Now not only have we reclaimed this  land for farming, but we've also protected the villages  below from flooding. 'This particular project is the first one locally on which  the FAO has collaborated with the World Food Programme, a  partner United Nations organisation.  The WFP provides in- kind compensation with its Food for Work programme, the  agronomist explains, while the FAO payrolls what is known as  Cash for Work.  Fifty-four local people in two teams are  working on the project for three to four months.  Every two  weeks they receive their pay, which stimulates the local  economy. The FAO is working on 17 such micro-drainage reclamation  projects in the Marigot area, and plans to expand the  programme.  On a plateau further up in the mountains, Désir  says, people plant different crops, including beets,  cabbage, onions, carrots and lettuce.  The climate is drier  there, so the FAO is training farmers in how to capture  rainwater in reservoirs and cisterns and conserve it with  drip irrigation. After a bone-jolting ride back down to Marigot, the coastal  road is paved.  A couple of hundred metres offshore, a  rowboat rides the swell.  Two men are standing in it, casting  a small net by hand.  The FAO has been working here too to  mitigate the downstream effects of the choked river. The erosion has washed so much sediment into the sea that it  has damaged near-shore fish habitats, the agronomist  explains.  The local fishing industry has been hurt by the  reduced yields, partly because its level of technology is so  low.  Few have big enough boats or motors to range out beyond  the shallows and catch the bigger fish found there. To remedy the situation, the FAO is helping local  communities organise fishing associations, with support from  local governments.  Four million dollars from Spain and  375,000 dollars from the national government are enabling  the associations to buy larger boats with better motors and  equipment so they can fish further offshore.  The project is  in its infancy: so far each association of about 150 people  has just one boat, which members have to take turns using. 'Fishing has never fit into the framework of the  government's agricultural policy,' Désir says.  'But as it  becomes more profitable, a certain synergy could emerge  between downstream and upstream, fishing and farming. '  Perhaps, he suggests, a small local tax could be levied on  fishing that would go to protect upstream drainages that all  depend on. Désir emphasises that all work on the projects is done by  local communities and governments, with support from the  national Ministry of Agriculture and sometimes international  donors.  The FAO provides expertise, materiel and some  funding, as well as helping to coordinate efforts.  Each  district has a series of working commissions that bring NGOs  and governments together to coordinate projects in  agriculture and other domains. On the terracing project, for example, the six community  organisers who mobilise local citizens are employed by the  Ministry of Agriculture.  But they and others receive on-the- job training from the FAO within the framework of the  project. The catastrophes these modest initiatives respond to are  mainly long-term, slow-motion ones.  But the appropriate  technology they provide and the community organisations they  strengthen can have important impacts on the daily lives of  very poor people struggling to stay on the land. Meanwhile, Haiti recently dodged one bullet when Hurricane  Earl veered north of the island.  But more storms menace  before the season ends in November. 