The waters of the Caribbean Sea are the warmest on record and the region's  imperilled corals are bleaching and beginning to die, experts warn. This year many corals are already bleached and dying in the southern  Caribbean Sea, especially in the Lesser Antilles, according to Mark Eakin  coordinator of Coral Reef Watch at the U. S.  National Oceanographic and  Atmospheric Administration (NOAA). The waters are even warmer than they were in 2005 when a severe bleaching  occurred across much of the Caribbean.  More than 60 percent of corals  around the U. S.  Virgin Islands died, Eakin told Tierramérica.  Water temperatures in this region reach their annual peak between September  and October.  The area affected by bleaching and dying corals will likely extend to the  region east of Nicaragua, past the island of Hispaniola (Haiti and Dominican  Republic) to Puerto Rico and the Lesser Antilles, and south along the  Caribbean coasts of Panama and South America, according to a warning  issued by Coral Reef Watch last month. 'There is the potential that this will be worse than 2005, unless some tropical  storms come through and mix the warm surface water with deeper, cooler  water,' Eakin said. Coral reefs are found in less than one percent of the world's oceans but are  home to 25 to 30 percent of all marine species.  Some one billion people  depend directly and indirectly on reefs for their livelihoods.  The International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) considers coral  reefs one of the life-support systems essential for human survival. A colourful piece of coral is made up of thousands of tiny animals called  polyps, which create cup-like limestone skeletons around themselves using  calcium from seawater. Reefs form as generation after generation of coral polyps live, build and die,  creating habitat for themselves and many other plants and animals. Coral gets its colours from algae called zooxanthellae, which cover the polyps  and produce sugars and amino acids to feed them.  In exchange, the algae get  a safe place to live with just enough light to grow through photosynthesis. This 250-million-year-old partnership is disrupted when the polyps are  stressed by too-warm sea temperatures or by pollution.  They lose their  colourful zooxanthellae coating and look white or bleached.  Without the food  that the algae provide, corals slowly starve and become vulnerable to disease. Prior to the 1980s only one large-scale bleaching event had ever been  recorded.  An increase in water temperature of just one or two degrees Celsius  above the average summer peak period is enough for bleaching to begin.  The longer the water temperatures remain above normal, the greater the  bleaching.  Those corals can recover if the stress is temporary -- lasting  weeks, instead of months. The greenhouse effect resulting from carbon emissions, largely from the  burning of fossil fuels, is trapping more heat in the atmosphere and is  gradually heating up the oceans.  In July, the global ocean surface temperature  reached a record 0. 62 degrees Celsius above the 20th century average,  according to NOAA. In Southeast Asia, ocean temperatures were 4. 0 degrees above normal in May.   Sixty to 80 percent of corals in various regions near Indonesia, Vietnam, Sri  Lanka, Thailand, and Malaysia bleached, and some died, according to surveys  done by the Wildlife Conservation Society, based in Indonesia.  Scientists there expect 2010 will be worse than the 1998 bleaching that killed  30 percent of reefs in the Indian and the western and central Pacific Ocean.   That year, 16 percent of the world's corals died due to bleaching. Until the last decade or so, overfishing, pollution and coastal development  were the biggest killers of coral.  Those threats still exist, although there have  been attempts to protect corals in marine protected areas (MPAs) and 'no- take' fishery reserves.  But despite best intentions, those efforts have largely been ineffective, says  Peter Sale, of the United Nations University's Institute for Water, Environment  and Health. 'Most MPAs do not work.  We call them 'paper parks',' Sale told Tierramérica.   They suffer from poor management and from design that fails to take into  account the fact that reefs do not exist in isolation.  If coastal development results in pollutants or sediments flowing into the  ocean, the nearby reefs are done for, even if they are in an MPA, he said. There is also a stunning shortage of scientific data.  'We don't know how big  an MPA should be to be effective,' said Sale.  In the Caribbean, the most important local fishing sector is lobster.  But,  according to Sale, no island fishery knows where its lobster comes from, so  how could lobster be properly managed? After hatching, lobster larvae are free-floating for an average of nine months,  which enables them to travel hundreds of kilometres away from where they  hatched, according to new research. This new data is part of a larger project that has produced an MPA  management guide: 'Preserving Reef Connectivity: A Handbook for Marine  Protected Area Managers'. He stressed that proper local protection and management of corals is  absolutely essential to help them withstand the effects climate change:  bleaching and ocean acidification, a process that weakens reef's calcium  skeleton. In the early 1980s, the residents of two small islands in the Philippines  brought their coral reefs and fisheries back from the brink of extinction by  setting up and managing no-fishing reserves.  Today, they catch more fish with less effort, while earning a good tourist  income, Sale said. In the Caribbean, MPAs need to be managed as a regional network that is  connected to the continental coastal zone.  'Done well, corals, fisheries and the coastal environment will all benefit,' he  said. (*This story was originally published by Latin American newspapers that are  part of the Tierramérica network.  Tierramérica is a specialised news service  produced by IPS with the backing of the United Nations Development  Programme, United Nations Environment Programme and the World Bank. ) 