When, following months of hype, ministers and negotiating  teams arrived in Copenhagen last December for a summit on  climate change, the expectations for what could be  accomplished were unrealistic and made the successes that did  occur seem less important than they were, says the climate  chief of Mexico, which will host this year’s successor to the  Copenhagen summit. Luis Alfonso de Alba is doing what he can to ensure that the  summit, starting in late November in Cancún, will avoid  those expectation traps and instead focus on specific goals  that can be accomplished and which can lay the groundwork  for a more ambitious, legally binding treaty several years  down the line. 'Before Copenhagen, most negotiators were aware that we were  far from what was still being considered the goal — a  legally binding outcome…but we still went to Copenhagen with  the expectation of having that single treaty,' de Alba told  reporters Thursday in Washington.  From the start, the Cancún  process has been different, he said. How long before that legally binding treaty becomes a  possibility?'Some countries are setting their sights on South Africa  next year.  Our view is that it will take longer than that,'  said Eliot Diringer, vice president for international  strategies at the Pew Centre on Global Climate Change, which  hosted de Alba’s briefing.  'Generally I think we're seeing a  greater sense of pragmatism within the negotiations and a  recognition that we won't have a binding outcome this year. 'It is hoped that this more deliberative, pragmatic  negotiation process will lead to decisions that can lay the  institutional infrastructure for that global climate treaty  somewhere in the future. 'Waiting until after South Africa doesn’t mean there won’t  be action,' noted de Alba, saying he sees a number of  concrete decisions that can be taken in Cancún that won’t be  affected by a lack of a legally binding treaty. Concrete goalsThe areas he is trying to emphasise as he leads Mexico’s  preparations for hosting the summit are finance and  transparency. 'We’ve tried to bring down the general goals and then  identify chapter by chapter what can be done,' he said. Within that approach, he is defining success at Cancún as an  agreement that confirms the commitments made in Copenhagen  and allows negotiators to go home with specific action that  can get done immediately.  He emphasised that dealing with  climate change requires steps and a timeline. One of those steps would be to ensure that the financial  commitments of industrialised countries are fulfilled.  To  that end, the Dutch government, with assistance from Mexico  and international organisations, has set up a website to  track whether those countries are providing the money they  said they would and where that money is going. The site is at www. faststartfinance. org.  Currently only the  contributions of the EU, Denmark, France, Germany, the  Netherlands, Norway and Britain are being tracked there, but  de Alba says the U. S.  is close to joining the project as  well. The nonbinding Copenhagen accord that came out of last  year’s summit promised 30 billion dollars in so-called fast  start financing to be provided to developing countries by  richer countries between 2010 and 2012.  This money would be  both for mitigation — moving away from reliance on fossil  fuels — and to assist with damage caused by climate-related  disasters. A long-term financing mechanism is still needed, however, as  well as the institutional framework that would be able to  decide which projects in which countries that financing goes  to. Even without a binding treaty, the 'infrastructure' of a  global climate system could be built up and countries could  begin to get comfortable within that infrastructure,  explained Diringer. 'For us, a set of decisions in Cancún that begins to fill  out the architecture would in fact be a significant  success,' he said, citing finance and transparency as the  key issues.  'If we can achieve agreement on them we can also  make progress across the full suite of issues. 'Taking the reverse approachThe move toward greater transparency, it is hoped, will  increase the trust between countries and allow for stronger  commitments and consensus at Cancún and future conferences. There has already been some progress in advancing this  trust. De Alba cites Copenhagen’s success in fostering for the  first time the recognition that everyone — even developing  countries — shares responsibility for fighting climate  change. But the fact that the only outcome was a nonbinding  agreement hashed out behind closed doors by a select few  countries — and which then failed to be fully approved —  means 'the priority task is rebuilding trust and  confidence', he said. With that in mind, he has, since Copenhagen, participated in  consultations around the world in countries that felt their  concerns were not necessarily taken into account in the  Copenhagen accord. 'The main focus of these consultations was rebuilding trust  and creating a very inclusive process of negotiations and  consultations that would be fully in line with the best  practices of the U. N.  and the multilateral system,' de Alba  explained. He says this approach could be seen as the reverse of that  taken in the run-up to Copenhagen. 'Before Copenhagen, the concentration was very much on the  major emitters, and what we have been doing since January is  going to the bottom and going from the bottom to the top —  particularly to those countries that were not satisfied with  the results of Copenhagen, that complained of not having  been involved to the full extent in the process. ' Chief among those critics was Bolivia, which hosted its own  World People's Conference on Climate Change and the Rights  of Mother Earth in April.  The meeting drew some 35,000  environmental activists from 125 nations, who called for the  creation of a climate justice tribunal, with powers to  prosecute persons or companies responsible for pollution,  and for a thorough reform of the U. N.  to allow countries  that fail to live up to their greenhouse gas reduction  commitments to be put on trial. 'May the next meeting in Mexico not be in vain; may  decisions be taken for the benefit of all people,' Bolivian  President Evo Morales said at the close of that summit. 