Argentina's glaciers, along with Chile's the most extensive of South America,  manifest the damage caused by climate change, while they also face threats from  mining and major transportation infrastructure projects.  A law to protect them  has been postponed yet again. Glaciers are vast reserves of freshwater, vital for feeding rivers, lakes and  underground water tables.  But rising global temperatures are shrinking their  ability to serve that function. 'Climate change is the main cause of glacier retraction, but also affecting  them are the petroleum industry, large-scale mining, high-impact tourism  and infrastructure projects,' glaciologist Ricardo Villalba, director of the  Argentine Institute of Snow and Glacier Research and Environmental Sciences  (IANIGLA), told Tierramérica. From 1984 to 2004, glacier decline in eight areas studied averaged between  10 and 15 percent, he said.  In some cases, the loss was greater, such as the  Upsala glacier, in the southern province of Santa Cruz, which is shrinking  rapidly.  It is the second largest glacier in South America, with an area of  approximately 870 square kilometres. Other glaciers are more stable, and some are even growing, like Perito  Moreno.  Both feed Lake Argentino.  Experts from IANIGLA and environmental organisations are promoting a law to  preserve these ice masses, which the Argentine Congress passed in 2008.  But  President Cristina Fernández vetoed it, saying the law was 'excessive' in  banning economic activities on or around the glaciers. After that failure, the lower house, the Chamber of Deputies, voted in August  on a new text, which was to come up for debate in the Senate on Sep.  8, but  the Senators decided to put it off until the end of the month. The greatest resistance comes from lawmakers representing Argentina's  western mining provinces, including San Juan and La Rioja. The text of this new bill 'is better' than the previous, in the opinion of activist  Hernán Giardini, of Greenpeace Argentina, because it establishes 'glaciers as  a public good. 'The proposed legislation 'protects the resource, restricts activities that  threaten the glaciers and requires an inventory with the information necessary  for appropriate protection and monitoring' of the ice masses, Giardini told  Tierramérica. It also prohibits any activity that implies the 'destruction or relocation' of  glaciers, and particularly activities that involve the use of contaminating  substances or which generate waste.  And it establishes strict sanctions for  violators. The proposed legislation calls for the creation of a national glacier inventory,  an essential tool that would be entrusted to the experts at IANIGLA.  If the law  is passed, the Institute would be given the authority to decide on every  mining or infrastructure project. Controversial projects like Pascua Lama -- an open-pit gold mine extending  into both Chile and Argentina, run by the Canadian company Barrick Gold --  would be subject to audit by the Institute, and could be suspended if  preservation of the glaciers is not guaranteed. Pascua Lama is located in the northern Chilean region of Atacama and the  western Argentine province of San Juan. With an estimated investment of 2 to 3 billion dollars, the company says it  would exploit the mine for about 21 years.  The company's website says the  mine has proven reserves of 17. 8 million ounces of gold and 718 million  ounces of silver. Construction has already begun at the mining site, and production is slated to  begin in 2013.  The approval process faced sharp resistance from farmers on  the Chilean side. On the Argentine side, environmentalists and farmers from the valley below  are also opposed.  They say the mine could accelerate the melting of the  glaciers, and the cyanide used in processing the gold ore could contaminate  the water that flows down to them.  Another initiative that has caused controversy is the proposed Agua Negra  tunnel, in the Andean mountain pass of the same name, which would connect  Argentina and Chile at about 5,000 metres above sea level.  It would complete  an inter-ocean route between the Chilean port of Coquimbo, on the Pacific,  and the Brazilian city of Porto Alegre, near the Atlantic. The tunnel would be located in the central-western region of Cuyo, where the  glacier decline is more critical than in the Patagonian Andes.  Freshwater is  already a scarce resource, states the study, 'Climate Change: Dark Future for  Glaciers,' published in August 2009 by Greenpeace Argentina. Farming and hydroelectric energy plants in that area depend on the water  supplied by the glaciers. Over the past decades, global warming and, in some areas, less-than-normal  precipitation have caused nearly all glaciers of the Patagonian Andes to  shrink, according to the report. Villalba said the glaciers are also crucial for protecting the high altitude  ecosystems, providing electricity, and serving as tourist attractions. One example is Los Glaciares National Park, declared a Natural Heritage of  Humanity site in 1981 by UNESCO (United Nations Educational, Scientific and  Cultural Organisation). The Patagonian Ice Field is located in the park, feeding 47 large glaciers, and  more than 200 smaller, independent glaciers. The park is also home to the Upsala glacier and the majestic Perito Moreno,  which in the first half of this year received more than 290,000 tourists.   Visitors to the site provide 44 percent of all admission revenues to  Argentina's national parks. (*This story was originally published by Latin American newspapers that are  part of the Tierramérica network.  Tierramérica is a specialised news service  produced by IPS with the backing of the United Nations Development  Programme, United Nations Environment Programme and the World Bank. ) 