The carbon dioxide emissions from burning such fossil fuels  have now melted the Arctic sea ice to its lowest volume since  before the rise of human civilisation and dangerously  upsetting the energy balance of the entire planet, climate  scientists are reporting. 'The Arctic sea ice has reached its four lowest summer  extents (area covered) in the last four years,' said Mark  Serreze, director of the National Snow and Ice Data Center  in the U. S.  city of Boulder, Colorado. The volume - extent and thickness - of ice left in the  Arctic likely reached the lowest ever level this month,  Serreze told IPS. 'I stand by my previous statements that the Arctic summer  sea ice cover is in a death spiral.  It's not going to  recover,' he said. There can be no recovery because tremendous amounts of extra  heat are added every summer to the region as more than  2. 5  million square kilometres of the Arctic Ocean have been  opened up to the heat of the 24-hour summer sun.  A warmer  Arctic Ocean not only takes much longer to re-freeze, it  emits huge volumes of additional heat energy into the  atmosphere, disrupting the weather patterns of the northern  hemisphere, scientists have now confirmed. 'The exceptional cold and snowy winter of 2009-2010 in  Europe, eastern Asia and eastern North America is connected  to unique physical processes in the Arctic,' James Overland  of the NOAA Pacific Marine Environmental Laboratory in the  United States told IPS in Oslo, Norway last June in an  exclusive interview.  ' Paradoxically, a warmer Arctic means 'future cold and snowy  winters will be the rule rather than the exception' in these  regions, Overland told IPS. There is growing evidence of widespread impacts from a  warmer Arctic, agreed Serreze.  'Trapping all that additional  heat has to have impacts and those will grow in the future,'  he said. One local impact underway is a rapid warming of the coastal  regions of the Arctic, where average temperatures are now  three to five degrees C warmer than they were 30 years ago.   If the global average temperature increases from the present  0. 8 C to two degrees C, as seems likely, the entire Arctic  region will warm at least four to six degrees and possibly  eight degrees due to a series of processes and feedbacks  called Arctic amplification. A similar feverish rise in our body temperatures would put  us in hospital if it didn't kill us outright. 'I hate to say it but I think we are committed to a four- to  six-degree warmer Arctic,' Serreze said. If the Arctic becomes six degrees warmer, then half of the  world's permafrost will likely thaw, probably to a depth of  a few metres, releasing most of the carbon and methane  accumulated there over thousands of years, said Vladimir  Romanovsky of the University of Alaska in Fairbanks and a  world expert on permafrost. Methane is a global warming gas approximately 25 times more  potent than carbon dioxide (CO2). That would be catastrophic for human civilisation, experts  agree.  The permafrost region spans 13 million square  kilometres of the land in Alaska, Canada, Siberia and parts  of Europe and contains at least twice as much carbon as is  currently present in the atmosphere — 1,672 gigatonnes of  carbon, according a paper published in Nature in 2009.   That's three times more carbon than all of the worlds'  forests contain. 'Permafrost thawing has been observed consistently across  the entire region since the 1980s,' Romanovsky said in an  interview. A Canadian study in 2009 documented that the southernmost  permafrost limit had retreated 130 kilometres over the past  50 years in Quebec’s James Bay region.  At the northern edge,  for the first time in a decade, the heat from the Arctic  Ocean pushed far inland this summer, Romanovsky said. There are no good estimates of how much CO2 and methane is  being released by the thawing permafrost or by the undersea  permafrost that acts as a cap over unknown quantities of  methane hydrates (a type of frozen methane) along the Arctic  Ocean shelf, he said. 'Methane is always there anywhere you drill through the  permafrost,' Romanovsky noted. Last spring , Romanovsky's colleagues reported that an  estimated eight million tonnes of methane emissions are  bubbling to the surface from the shallow East Siberian  Arctic shelf every year in what were the first-ever  measurements taken there.  If just one percent of the Arctic  undersea methane reaches the atmosphere, it could quadruple  the amount of methane currently in the atmosphere. Abrupt releases of large amounts of CO2 and methane are  certainly possible on a scale of decades, he said.   The  present relatively slow thaw of the permafrost could rapidly  accelerate in a few decades, releasing huge amounts of  global warming gases. Another permafrost expert, Ted Schuur of the University of  Florida, has come to the same conclusion.  'In a matter of  decades we could lose much of the permafrost,' Shuur told  IPS. Those losses are more likely to come rapidly and upfront, he  says.  In other words, much of the permafrost thaw would  happen at the beginning of a massive 50-year meltdown  because of rapid feedbacks. Emissions of CO2 and  methane from thawing permafrost are  not yet factored into the global climate models and it will  be several years before this can be done reasonably well,  Shuur said. 'Current mitigation targets are only based on anthropogenic  (human) emissions,' he explained. Present pledges by governments to reduce emissions will  still result in a global average temperature increase of 3. 5  to 3. 9 C by 2100, according to the latest analysis.  That  would result in an Arctic that's 10 to 16 degrees C warmer,  releasing most of the permafrost carbon and methane and  unknown quantities of methane hydrates. This why some climate scientists are calling for a rapid  phaseout of fossil fuels, recommending that fossil fuel  emissions peak by 2015 and decline three per cent per year.   But even then there's still a 50-percent probability of  exceeding two degrees C current studies show.  If the  emissions peak is delayed until 2025, then global  temperatures will rise to three degrees C, the Arctic will  be eight to 10 degrees warmer and the world will lose most  its permafrost. Meanwhile, a new generation of low-cost, thin-film solar  roof and outside wall coverings being made today has the  potential to eliminate burning coal and oil to generate  electricity, energy experts believe — if governments have  the political will to fully embrace green technologies. 