While global food prices declined for the first half of this  year, they have spiked in recent months, according to a new  World Bank publication, and this volatility could in turn push  up the local food prices of the world's poorest and most  malnourished countries. The Bank's grain price index had declined by 16 percent over  the first six months of 2010 before rising that same amount  between mid-June and August. For now, the price increases have had mixed effects on  domestic prices.  In the four months leading up to July,  wheat prices rose 27 percent in Afghanistan - after those  prices had declined steadily over the past year.  In eastern  and southern Africa, though, the price of the main staple,  maize, has continued to decline this summer.  In Kenya, for  instance, maize prices are at less than half their Dec.  2009  levels, with smaller recent declines in Tanzania, Uganda and  elsewhere. 'These examples show that local food prices are often  determined by domestic or regional factors unrelated to  global commodity market trends,' the World Bank report says.   Overall, out of the 42 countries for which the Bank has data  on the price of their staple food until July, the price of  that staple was lower in July than it was in April in over  half of them. Fears of a repeat of the 2007-08 food crisis might therefore  be overblown, at least for some parts of the world.  The Bank  notes that the price spikes were fueled by projections of  low wheat production by powerhouse producers Russia,  Ukraine, Kazakhstan and Canada. Russia had even announced a ban on wheat exports due to  expectations this summer's heat wave and drought would  result in its crop being a third less than last year. But the Bank and other institutions have pointed out that  even though commodity markets have been fearful about grain  shortages, and thus have driven up prices, there are 'ample  world wheat stocks' and good prospects for the wheat output  of the U. S. , EU and other producers. The Washington-based International Food Policy Research  Institute (IFPRI) notes that today's food situation is  different than the 2007-08 crisis in a number of ways. 'We are able to cope with lost production better than we did  two years ago,' Maximo Torero, director of IFPRI's Markets,  Trade and Institutions Division, said last week.  He noted  that both wheat production and wheat stocks are higher this  year than during that crisis. 'The United States alone holds reserves of 26 million metric  tonnes — more than enough to cover the combined estimated  loss of 18 million metric tonnes from Russia, Ukraine,  Kazakhstan and the European Union,' he said. How much grain exists in the world's stocks and whether  global panic is warranted or not, though, might be somewhat  beside the point.  The Bank publication, called Food Price  Watch, is meant to 'highlight the fact that irrespective of  what global commodity prices are doing. . . there are always  countries where food prices are rising rapidly' due to civil  war, droughts or any number of reasons, says Hassan Zaman, a  lead economist at the Bank's Poverty Reduction and Equity  group, which produces the publication. 'Even when global prices were going down, there were  countries where they were rising,' he said. But with the recent upward trend in the price of wheat and  other staples, not even those global prices are going down  now.  The Bank reports that wheat prices rose by 56 percent  between June and August.  More troubling, though, is that  those rises have had spillover effects on other staple  foods. With more expensive wheat, demand for substitutes like  sorghum and maize has increased, leading to prices for those  grains rising globally by eight and seven percent  respectively between July and August.  Rice prices, likewise,  rose 10 percent in August after having declined 20 percent  since January. Demand is not the only factor here, of course.  The U. S.   maize harvest, by far the world's largest, had been  projected to be phenomenal this year, but in recent weeks  those projections have been significantly lowered — even as  demand for exported U. S.  maize is rising.  And the floods  engulfing an Italy-sized swath of Pakistan are expected to  mean its rice exports will be 35 percent lower than last  year's.  In June, pre-flood, a report by the U. N.  Food and  Agriculture Organisation (FAO) had anticipated record levels  of rice exports from Pakistan. The Bank report highlights the risk that these global price  spikes hold for countries where food prices were already  rising, Zaman told IPS.  'There is even more of a risk that  these prices will go up in vulnerable countries, not only  due to domestic problems but now due to global price rises  as well. 'For now, though, that is still just a risk.  Global price  changes take time to reach domestic markets, and in that  time those prices might turn around. 'In order for world wheat prices to drive up the price of  bread, they would have to stay high for a prolonged period.   In 2007, prices rose continuously for months on end before  hitting consumers.  Today, prices are volatile,' says Torero. He says the riots in Mozambique that resulted from a 30  percent rise in bread prices earlier this month were not  related to rising global wheat prices but to a rising cost  of imports from South Africa, a key trading partner. The World Bank writes that 'it is too early to make  conclusive statements on the impact of the very recent  global wheat price spikes at the na¬tional and household  level. 'The FAO has likewise stated that there does not currently  appear to be a crisis, but that it is concerned about the  amount of volatility in food markets. And that volatility might bode ill for progress toward  overcoming challenges like those laid out in the Millennium  Development Goals being discussed at the U. N.  this week. 'These recent global staple price increases raise the risk  of domestic food price spikes in low income countries and  its consequent impacts on poverty, hunger and oth¬er human  development goals,' according to the Bank. 