While officials meeting in Montreal, Canada failed to finalise  a key protocol to the Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD)  Tuesday, biodiversity is scheduled to be at the top of  Wednesday's agenda of the U. N.  General Assembly in New York. Some 140 world leaders have gathered here this week to  reaffirm their commitment to achieve the Millennium  Development Goals (MDGs) by their 2015 deadline.  Goal seven,  environmental sustainability, includes a target to 'Reduce  biodiversity loss, achieving, by 2010, a significant  reduction in the rate of loss. ' But experts say that the loss of biodiversity is occurring  at an unprecedented rate.  As a result, the MDG7 target aim  to substantially curb this trend by the end of this year  will not be met.  'Tropical forests continue to be felled, destroying valuable  endemic species and disrupting local, regional and global  climates,' U. N.  Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon said earlier  this year.  'Climate change and ocean acidification are  destroying coral reefs.  Fisheries are increasingly  overexploited, condemning millions of the world's poorest  people to unemployment and malnutrition. 'Ban designated 2010 as the 'International Year of  Biodiversity' to raise awareness of this issue.  And the MDG  summit's last day, Wednesday, will coincide with the world  body's first-ever high-level meeting on biodiversity. The U. N.  estimates that species are disappearing at one  hundred times the natural rate of extinction.  Twenty-one  percent of mammals, 30 percent of amphibians, 12 percent of  birds and 27 percent of reef-building corals are in danger  of dying off, says the International Union for Conservation  of Nature (IUCN), which compiles a 'Red List of Threatened  Species. ''Communities everywhere will reap the negative consequences  [of biodiversity loss], but the poorest people and the most  vulnerable countries will suffer most,' Ban said.  'Seventy  percent of the world's poor live in rural areas, and depend  directly on biodiversity for their daily sustenance and  income. 'Meanwhile, a three-day meeting meant to iron out the details  of a CBD draft protocol on Access and Benefits-Sharing (ABS)  finished in Montreal Tuesday with important issues still  outstanding. 'Money will flow if we can reach an agreement on this, so  we're calling on governments to show real leadership and try  to get over their differences and come up with something  they can agree on,' Jane Smart, global thematic director of  the Biodiversity Conservation Group of IUCN, told IPS.  'It's  become very politically a hot issue. 'Entered into force in 1993, the CBD is a legally-binding  international treaty aimed at conserving biodiversity,  ensuring the sustainable use of resources and the fair and  equitable sharing of benefits. The latter objective, referred to as Access and Benefit- sharing, has become a contentious topic in discussions among  member states.  According to the Secretariat of the CBD, ABS  'refers to the way genetic resources — whether from plants,  animals or microorganisms — are accessed in countries of  origin, and how the benefits that result from their use by  various research institutes, universities or private  companies are shared with the people or countries that  provide them. 'Next month, the tenth meeting of the Conference of Parties  (COP10) to the CBD is scheduled to take place in Nagoya,  Japan.  It was hoped that the ABS protocol, which has  undergone heated negotiations since last March, would be  ironed out at this week's Montreal meeting.  	 'It's very, very critical for the Nagoya COP that the ABS  regime is finalised, because then the convention can come  together with its three objectives… on the way to being now  fully implemented,' Cyriaque Sendashonga, director of  programme and policy of IUCN, told IPS. At the last meeting to negotiate the ABS protocol, held in  Montreal in July, Canada objected to generalised ABS  requirements, instead favouring contractually negotiated  terms depending on the parties and resources involved.  But  developing countries and rights groups worry that this  approach might result in inequitable outcomes for indigenous  and other minority peoples. 'We go to Nagoya with a number of key issues to finalise,'  said Timothy Hodges of Canada and Fernando Casas of  Colombia, the co-chairs of this week's meeting, in a  statement.  Governments have agreed to conclude negotiations  as soon as possible and no later than the COP10, they added. 'What we're really hoping is that the final outcome, the  final regime is one that is fair and agreeable to all  parties involved and is able to achieve the objective it's  meant to achieve: To facilitate or encourage… access to  genetic resources, ensure that there is fairness in those  agreements, ensure that… the indigenous people, the local  communities, the women… who have a primary role, a key role  in protecting those resources are rewarded for that effort,'  Sendashonga told IPS. 