The catastrophic floods in Pakistan have added urgency to a  high-level United Nations summit this week, with delegates  from mostly South Asian nations convening Tuesday to call for  increased technology transfer from richer countries and to  compare strategies to avert the worst effects of climate  change. 'Climate change is a reality,' said Bangladeshi Prime  Minister Sheikh Hasina Wazed at a side event of the  Millennium Development Goals Summit, which concludes  Wednesday.  'We in South Asia know it through experience.  The  onslaught of natural disasters has increased in frequency  and ferocity in our region.  Moreover, the abnormal, rapid  melting of the Himalayan glaciers and the rise of sea level  portends cataclysmic consequences. ' Several factors make South Asian nations particularly  vulnerable to the effects of a climate shift - high poverty  rates; high reliance on industries like fishing that are  vulnerable to changing sea levels and more powerful storms;  already existing stresses on health and well-being, like HIV  and illiteracy; poor economic and social infrastructure in  many places; and a lack of technology and resources that  make adaptation more difficult. Though less developed countries are low contributors to  global warming, they are often the first to feel its effects  through natural disasters like hurricanes, droughts, and  floods.  Agricultural production can be harmed and vector- borne diseases like malaria and dengue can increase as the  climate changes.  'Climate change is imposing additional burdens on the  world's poorest and most vulnerable and threatens to reverse  hard-won development gains,' said Helen Clark, head of the  U. N.  Development Programme.  Natural disasters halt the  progress that must be made to achieve the MDGs by 2015, she  stressed. Delegates discussed ways to mitigate future problems.  Clark  emphasised the importance of investing in disaster risk  reduction and preparedness, which costs less and saves more  lives than waiting until a natural disaster has struck.   South Asian countries are currently working together to  establish a regional system for early warnings and risk  management.  The support of the international community, through  financing and technology transfer, is essential, said  delegates.  Unilateral action is also important, however, as countries  already affected by climate change cannot afford to wait for  the world to act.  The Maldives, for example, has taken it  upon itself to become carbon neutral within 10 years through  legislation regulating emissions.  Though delegates expressed disappointment over the failure  of U. N.  member states to agree on a binding treaty on  climate change last year in Copenhagen, they are preparing  to bring their ideas to the U. N.  Climate Change Conference  to be held in Cancún later this year. As Mexican Secretary of Foreign Affairs Patricia Espinosa  said, countries cannot simply wait for experts to solve the  problem but must make real changes.  'This is a political  matter that goes to the heart of the way our societies are  organised,' she said. Civil society groups also met Tuesday to discuss the changes  needed to mitigate environmental damage in a panel linking  environmental sustainability (MDG 7) and maternal health  (MDG 5). Excess population increase puts stresses on both mothers and  the environment.  Those countries with high population growth  and high vulnerability to climate change are in an  especially precarious position. Universal access to reproductive healthcare, said Population  Action International's Kathleen Mogelgaard, could be a tool  in the fight against climate change.  Millions of women  worldwide currently want to be able to control their  reproductive lives but lack access to services.  Unplanned pregnancies increase the rate of maternal death  and impede development, said Musimbi Kanyoro, director of  the Population and Reproductive Health Programme at the  Packard Foundation.  Failing to meet the need for family  planning limits the life choices of women and forces the  land in countries with limited resources to support more  people than it can handle.  Speakers stressed that family planning costs less and is  easier to implement than many other environmental  programmes.  