Meeting the growing demand for energy in the U. S. , even  through sustainable means, could entail greater threats to the  environment, new research shows. The study was carried out by Circle of Blue, a network of  journalists and scientists dedicated to water  sustainability, and could have implications not just for the  relationship between energy demand and water scarcity in the  U. S.  but elsewhere in the world, as well.   'It is not just that energy production could not occur  without using vast amounts of water.  It's also that it's  occurring in the era of climate change, population growth  and steadily increasing demand for energy,' explained Circle  of Blue's Keith Schneider, who presented the findings in  Washington Wednesday. 'The result is that the competition for water at every stage  of the mining, processing, production, shipping and use of  energy is growing more fierce, more complex and much more  difficult to resolve,' he said.   About half the 410 billion  gallons of water the U. S.  withdraws daily goes to cooling  thermoelectric power plants, and most of that to cooling  coal-burning plants, according to the U. S.  Geological  Survey. Meanwhile, climate change is leading to decreased snowmelt,  rains and freshwater supplies, says Circle of Blue. One of the things missing from the discussion, then, is the  recognition that saving energy also saves water, the group  contends. The U. S.  government has not been blind to the conflict  between energy and water needs.  The first part of a report  commissioned by the U. S.  Congress in 2005 laid out the  consequences of not paying enough attention to water supply  issues in increasing energy production.  The second part,  which would have laid out a research agenda and begun  developing solutions, has yet to be made public, says  Schneider. He says the U. S.  Department of Energy has declined repeated  requests to explain why the report has not been published. Energy demand in the U. S.  is expected to increase by 40  percent as the U. S.  population rises above 440 million by  2050.  The water supply will not be able to support that  growth, Schneider says. Renewable sources of energy will certainly be a large part  of trying to meet that energy demand, but these, too, come  with a hidden water cost. In 2009, the U. S.  dedicated 23 million acres of public lands  in six states for new solar electricity-generating plants as  part of its economic stimulus package, which apportioned  nearly 100 billion dollars for clean energy projects.   Though the plan appeared promising, environmentalists soon  began to point it could have damaging, unintended  consequences.  Schneider notes that criticism of the impact  the water-cooled solar plants could have on water priorities  in the U. S.  Southwest even came from within the government. 'In arid settings, the increased water demand from  concentrating solar energy systems employing water-cooled  technology could strain limited water resources already  under development pressure from urbanization, irrigation  expansion, commercial interests and mining,' wrote Jon  Jarvis, then head of the National Park Service's Pacific  West Region, in a February 2009 internal memo. 	  'Solar generating plants that use conventional cooling  technology use two to three times as much water as coal- fired power plants,' Schneider noted. In other countries, the threat of water scarcity is even  more pertinent. Egypt, for example, has a population of approximately 82  million, but an annual water quota of about 86 billion cubic  metres — and the population is expected to rise by more than  10 million people in the next decade. Yet 30 European blue chip companies are set to invest 560  billion dollars over the next 40 years to build solar power  plants in North Africa as part of the Desertec Industrial  Initiative.  Egypt, Morocco and Tunisia have agreed to work  with the initiative.    Comparing this project with the  U. S. 's, Schneider notes that in an environment that faces  even greater water scarcity than the southwestern U. S. , such  projects could prove disastrous.   Circle of Blue calls the intersection of a rising demand for  energy and diminishing supply water a 'choke point', but  energy development — whether of the fossil fuel or renewable  variety — is just one aspect of the water scarcity crisis  that is unfolding in various regions of the globe. Yemen is widely seen as the place where this scarcity will  hit first and hardest. 'Analysts are worried Yemen could be the first country in  the world to effectively run out of water,' said Christine  Parthemore, a fellow at the Center for a New American  Security, where she studies the intersection of natural  resources and security issues.  She spoke at a separate event  Wednesday. Yemen, which has no rivers and cannot afford desalination,  is drawing water at around 400 times its replacement rate,  she says, and this looming crisis is compounding other  issues in the region, like the fact that Yemen has become a  key recruiting spot for groups like al Qaeda. 'We are about to see water wars in the future,' said U. S.   General Anthony Zinni.  'We have seen fuel wars; we're about  to see water wars. '