Dubbed 'The Great Green Wall,' a human-made ecological barrier  designed to stop rapidly encroaching deserts and combat  climate change is coming up across China.  By 2050, the  artificial forest is to stretch 400 million hectares —  covering more than 42 percent of China’s landmass.    China already has the largest human-made forest in the  world, covering more than 500,000 square kilometres, and the  Communist Party this year announced it had reached its  stated goal of 20 percent forest cover by 2010.  The  government envisions a line of trees stretching 4,480 km  from Xinjiang province in the far west to Heilongjiang  province in the east.     The project began in 1978, and three years later the  National People’s Congress, China’s top legislative body,  passed a resolution to make it the duty of every citizen  above age 11 to plant at least three Poplar, Eucalyptus,  Larch or other saplings every year.     Ordinary citizens have planted some 56 billion trees  across China in the last decade, according to government  statistics.  In 2009 alone, China planted 5. 88 million  hectares of forest.  Former U.  S.  Vice President and Nobel  Prize winner Al Gore has said China plants two and a half  times more trees every year than the rest of the world  combined.  He called the endeavour 'the largest tree-planting  programme the world has ever seen. '    The reforestation programme is part of a multi-pronged  effort by China to combat climate change.     In 2007, China surpassed the United States as the world’s  biggest carbon emitter, and emissions are expected to grow  as China’s economy does.  China has invested heavily in clean  technology and has pledged to close thousands of heavy- polluting factories, but it has also faced criticism from  other countries for moving too slowly and failing to agree  to international standards.     The benefits of reforestation, advocates say, are  evident.  Notably, the trees help stop China’s fast-moving  deserts in the west and north.  In a 2006 report to the  United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification, China  declared that 2. 63 million square km — or 27 percent of its  landmass — was covered with desert, compared with 18 percent  in 1994.  China’s grasslands have shrunk by 15,000 square km  annually since the early 1980s.     Moreover, China’s forestry scientists say the new forests  are better at absorbing carbon than slow-growth forests (of  which China has virtually none remaining).  They argue that  fast-growing poplar and white birch trees capture perhaps  double the amount of carbon as Korean pine, larch and firs.     The government is increasingly using the Great Green Wall  as a propaganda tool to trumpet its efforts combating  climate change.  Every spring, about three million Communist  Party members, civil servants and model workers head to the  countryside to plant trees in a massive propaganda event.     In April, President Hu Jintao planted trees in Beijing to  mark the city’s 26th annual voluntary tree planting.  Some  two million people joined Hu in that planting exercise,  according to the state’s ‘People’s Daily’ newspaper.     But doubts remain about the impact of this green  campaign.     While the government stresses the forests’ importance in  combating decades of environmental damage, some critics say  the type of forests planted, and their location, limit their  effectiveness.  They argue that the Great Green Wall has  contributed to a significant decline in China’s forest  quality.  In many of the newly planted forests, few animals  thrive, some experts explain.    Jiang Gaoming, professor at the Chinese Academy of  Sciences’ Institute of Botany and vice secretary-general of  the China Society of Biological Conservation, said the Great  Green Wall has, in some places, accelerated ecological  degeneration by putting pressure on precious water resources  in arid and semi-arid regions.     Jiang also said that trees planted during the Great Green  Wall project are non-native.  'Native trees actually play a  much bigger role in preventing desertification,' he told  IPS.    In a study released in May, scientists from the  University of Oklahoma and Fudan University in Shanghai  found that reforestation and afforestation — the creation of  new forests — actually lowers a forest’s potential to lesson  climate change.    The study found that areas where natural forests are  replaced by reforestation — called plantations — do not  actually help control carbon emissions, and that converting  farmland to forests decreases the amount of carbon absorbed  by the soil.     Authors of the study also said that converted soil also  loses 80 percent of its capability to degrade methane, a  greenhouse gas that traps more heat than carbon dioxide.    Jiang Fengguo, director at the Soil and Water  Conservation Supervision Station in Hexigtan Banner, Inner  Mongolia Autonomous Region, told IPS that the Great Green  Wall has had some success slowing the encroaching desert.     But he worries about the Great Green Wall’s influence on  the local biological chain, including its impact on animal  species.  Moreover, Jiang said, the Great Green Wall may not  be enough.  'There will still be problems.  Desertification  still exists, and the continuing deterioration of the  ecological environment has not been reversed,' he said. * This IPS story is part of a series supported by the  Climate and Development Knowledge Network  http://www. cdkn. org