The new government of Trinidad and Tobago wasted little time.   In fact, Finance Minister Winston Dookeran took less than 30  seconds of a two-hour budget presentation to announce that the  People's Partnership government, headed by the country's first  female prime minister, Kamla Persad Bissessar, was scrapping  the $66. 6 million dollar smelter plant project involving  investors from China and Brazil. 'In addition to the health and environmental risk, there is  also serious concern as to Alutrint's viability and the  optimal use of our gas.  This project shall cease and an  alternative strategy will be put into place for the  southwest peninsula,' Dookeran said. The proposed 125,000 metric-tonnes-per-year aluminum smelter  complex had been fiercely defended by the Patrick Manning  government until it was swept out of power in May.  It would  have resulted in the Brazilian conglomerate Votorantim Group  having a 40 percent stake while the Trinidad and Tobago  government held the remaining 60 percent. China's Exim Bank was providing the $66. 6 million dollar  credit facility for construction of the project, which was  halted last year after the High Court ruled that the  decision of the Environmental Management Authority (EMA) to  grant a Certificate of Environmental Clearance was illegal.   The Manning government appealed and a ruling was expected  soon.  But the government's new position has now made the  ruling academic. Energy Minister Carol Seepersad-Bachan said that plants to  manufacture inorganic chemicals, glass, alternative energy- industry plastics and agro-business products were likely to  take the place of the smelter plant, which environmentalists  said would have been highly toxic and would have affected  the health of area residents. 'Despite what we have been told that the plant would have  been a modern facility and safe, no one was saying how we  were going to get rid of the waste generated,'  environmentalist Dr.  Wayne Kublalsingh told IPS. 'Because of Alutrint, residents of La Brea and environs  would have to be tested for cancer every six months,' he  added, referring to a 2008 medical monitoring plan by the  Caribbean Health Research Council and the International  Institute for Healthcare and Human Development. Not everyone agrees.  David Renwick, who was given a national  award in 2008 for his coverage of energy issues in Trinidad  and Tobago, said that 'the fact is that aluminium smelting  poses no threat these days either to health or the  environment — as real experts from countries that have  produced aluminium for decades have repeatedly testified. 'Health questions aside, at the parliamentary debate on the  budget that ended Thursday, Planning and Development  Minister Mary King said that the project simply did not make  economic sense. 'We don't own the bauxite, we don't have alumina.  It is said  that we will not use very much natural gas, we are not  situated in a big market for alumina products and we have no  experience over how we acquired or created any of the  sophisticated know-how of the industry which today is the  basis of competitive advantage,' she said. Dookeran acknowledged that the government would have to use  'diplomatic and commercial solutions' to deal with some of  the contractual intricacies involved in the loan arrangement  and admitted that the decision to scrap the plant carried  'implications'. Alutrint's chief executive Philip Julien said there were  contractual ramifications which he was not at liberty to  disclose. 'Alutrint remains committed to serving its shareholders and  awaits further directives from them pertaining to the  company's continued operations.  Bearing in mind the  government is also the majority shareholder for Alutrint,  government is in the best position to comment further on  this matter at this time,' said Julien. The smelter plant had been one of the issues in the last  general election campaign.  The main opposition People's  National Movement (PNM) said that the fact that it won seats  in the areas where the plant would have been situated is an  indication that the residents supported the initiative. In fact, during the ongoing budget debate in Parliament,  some residents staged demonstrations demanding that the  government reverse its decision to scrap the project and  allow for meaningful employment in the area. 'Give us the project, we have already spent so much money on  it,' said one protestor, while another said that the  'government joins with its environmental friends to kill the  project without talking to us'. Seepersad-Bachan says there are already prospective  candidates for the plastics project and an integrated  complex for a world-scale manufacture of glass and  photovoltaic cells to replace the smelter project. She said the plastics project would require an investment of  $2 billion and the integrated glass and photovoltaic cells  project, which requires the importation of silica from  neighbouring Guyana, would require a capital investment of  $2. 5 billion. 'The alternative energy industry is a growing industry.  It  is close to $100 billion now and it is expected that the  cost of solar panel will be able — in three years — to meet  the cost of conventional energy supplies,' Seepersad-Bachan  said, adding that there would be a 'big market' for those  products and would also create 'significant employment' for  local citizens. 