Robert Chan shuffles a pile of legal briefs in his temporary  office — a wooden cargo vessel that he and a team of volunteer  paralegals had apprehended during an operation against  smugglers of logs and other forest products from the central  Philippine province of Palawan to Malaysia.    'They (court officials) probably think this is already  where I hold office permanently,' he said, examining summons  that had just been delivered by a court clerk on a Monday  morning.    Chan, a lawyer who heads the Palawan NGO Network — Global  Legal Action for Climate Change (PNNI-GLACC), explained that  he and his group of civilian volunteers were taking turns  guarding the vessel, which was anchored off the city pier.    Owned by a trader based in the southern Palawan town of  Rizal, the vessel was part of a fleet that had been  smuggling logs and mangrove tanbark to Malaysia, which  shares a maritime border with the Philippines in the Sulu  Sulawesi seas, Chan said.  These, among the valuable timber  in Palawan’s forests, are prohibited from being cut under a  ban on commercial logging in the province.    The apprehension of the vessel yielded a cargo of Palawan  ipil hardwood valued in the black market at 65,000 U. S.   dollars.  Chan said the bust was important because it broke  up an entrenched smuggling syndicate that had been operating  out of Rizal and Balabac towns for at least 10 years.    But instead of filing the usual forestry violation and  criminal cases, Chan chose not to sue the boat owner or its  crew but filed an administrative case seeking forfeiture of  the vessel in favour of the government.    'It is a legal strategy that is a trademark of our  approach to enforcement.  We’d rather not get stuck in  prosecuting criminal cases that will drag on for no less  than five years, if we’re lucky,' Chan explained.  Here, we  can forfeit the vessel used in the crime in less than a  year’s time.  What is important is not that you incarcerate  people, but teach them a lesson and make it extremely  difficult for them to continue. '   The focus on confiscation of vessels and equipment such  as chainsaws from violators of environmental laws — as a way  of upsetting operations that would otherwise be difficult to  prosecute in court — is something that Chan and his  colleagues have developed from a decade of enforcement  initiatives.    What allows a civilian group like PNNI to go after  suspected violators of environmental laws is a doctrine in  Philippine criminal law providing for 'citizens’ arrest',  which overrides the normal requirement of serving a warrant  issued by a judge.    In its operations, Chan’s team is accompanied by up to  two uniformed police officers from the Philippine National  Police Maritime Police.  They are the only armed members of  the posse.  'It is a very good partnership because we are  able to accomplish a lot even with limited resources  available,' PNP Maritime chief for Palawan Col Agustin  Molina said.    Chan says the impact of citizens’ operations — against  those who use the seas for activities like logging or  illegal fishing — has been strongly felt throughout Palawan,  considered the Philippines’ last ecological frontier.     Since the start of its campaign a decade ago, PNNI has  accumulated more than 300 unlicensed chainsaws, which had  been used in illegal logging, without having to criminally  prosecute a hired hand or its owner.  The volume of this haul  is more than double what the law enforcement agencies have  been able to confiscate.    In May this year, the same team busted a group that  supplies sodium cyanide to fishermen for use in catching  live groupers.  A banned chemical substance in fishing,  cyanide — even in its diluted form used to stun fish — is  highly potent to corals and kills any reef it comes into  contact with.    In that bust, PNNI stalked a large boat for three days  near Double Island in Rizal town, and some of its members  posed as fishermen buying cyanide.  The operation netted  seven kilogrammes of the banned substance and the  confiscation of the fishing boat itself.    Efren Balladares, that group’s team leader, attributes  its success to the support of communities that give them  information about the illegal loggers and fishers’  activities.  'We have a network of trained paralegals who are  members of the communities and they act as our assets,'  Balladares.    At the same, its successes have come with a heavy — and  lethal — price.  Over the last decade, three persons  associated with Chan’s group have been murdered in  connection with their participation in community-driven  enforcement operations.  A team leader of an operation to  demolish an illegal fish trap was mugged and left for dead,  but luckily survived.    The group’s eight paralegal volunteers get a meager food  allowance of 10 dollars during each operation, and sometimes  a bonus for a major bust.  'It is the passion for the  environment that keeps us together,' Balladares said.    In truth, it has not been easy to convince funding  agencies to support this kind of environmental work.  'We  have approached agencies such as the European Union and  AusAid.  .  .   Unfortunately, these agencies don’t appreciate  the realities of law enforcement in the Philippines.  They  see is as a task of government and think the NGOs have no  business doing enforcement work,' Chan said.    But the local government sees things differently.  In  2009, Puerto Princesa Mayor Edward Hagedorn gave Chan’s team  a one million peso (22,753 dollar) fund and a secondhand  off-road vehicle.  'Attorney Chan’s work needs to be  supported by local governments.  This is the true essence of  good governance participation,' Hagedorn had said when he  signed the check for the fund.   