After years of losing the war against animal traffickers and  poachers, Malaysia has finally responded with the passage of a  new wildlife conservation law.  But experts say it might be too  late for some of this South-east Asian country’s endangered  species.    They say that some species like the Sumatran rhinoceros,  orang-utans, Malayan tigers and clouded leopards, are  fighting a losing battle for their survival, so that all  eyes are now on how this new law will be implemented.     'The tough new measures are probably four decades  overdue,' said conservationist Mohamed Idris.  'Official  neglect and corruption is fuelling the international trade  in threatened species and the tough new law and action  against corrupt officials may be too late for some  endangered species. '    The bill, which provides for significantly higher  penalties and mandatory jail terms for a wide range of  wildlife crimes, is expected to come into force as law in  December 2010, following its approval by the Malaysian  parliament in August.     'The apathetic official attitude (in the past) is a  tragedy of unimaginable proportion for our wildlife,' said  one conservationist working for a government agency that  preserves wildlife habitat at a forest reserve in East  Malaysia, who declined to be named.  'Even the rare and  endangered tapir are found dead on the roadside, killed by  speeding vehicles,' she said.     'It all depends how seriously and effectively the  government implement the new law,' she added.  'If  effectively enforced, the law can give wildlife a respite  against open and blatant poaching. '    Critics point out that the Wildlife Department and other  agencies given the power to arrest and prosecute potential  offenders are understaffed, poorly paid and ill-trained.     'They are not modern, don’t have modern equipment, they  don’t use modern technology and their budget is minuscule  compared to the challenges they face in protecting wildlife  against poaches,' lawmaker Kulasegaran Murugesan said.  'The  law is fine but the implementation part is wanting. '    'We have neglected our rich wildlife heritage to the  extent that many rare species like the clouded leopard and  orang-utans are endangered and will soon disappear,'  Murugesan said.  'We have the law but without the budget, the  battle is lost. '    The new law will replace the country’s 38-year-old  Protection of Wildlife Act — considered obsolete because the  maximum 15,000 Malaysian ringgit (5,000 U. S.  dollar) fine  for any wildlife crime is paltry by today’s standards.      The updated wildlife conservation law will increase the  minimum fine to at least 33,000 dollars and provide for a  mandatory jail sentence for offences such as setting snares.   It will also close loopholes in the current law, including  by imposing penalties for selling products claiming to  contain parts of protected species or their derivatives.   Zoos will not be allowed to operate without permits.     The new law will add to the number of agencies empowered  to enforce wildlife laws, roping in police and immigration  customs officers.  Those convicted of wildlife crimes will be  barred from holding any licence, permit or special permit  for five years from the commencement of the case.     'Finally, Malaysian agencies have a solid wildlife law  that they can wield against poachers and smugglers, who have  had little to fear from the paltry fines and jail sentences  of the past,' said William Schaedla, regional director of  TRAFFIC South-east Asia, a wildlife trade monitoring  network.     The wildlife conservation bill has widespread support  among Malaysians, a number of whom had written members of  parliament and asked them to support the bill during the  parliamentary debates in July and August.  In 2009, thousands  signed a petition seeking better protection of the country’s  wildlife.     'The new law has given Malaysia the means and the  opportunity drive home the message that it is serious about  curbing this menace,' Schaedla said.  'So we hope the new law  will be the catalyst for an all-out war against wildlife  crime and that it will result in more prosecution of such  criminals in the courts. '    Yet, some fear that political realities might get in the  way of the new law’s implementation.     A case in point is wildlife trafficker Anson Wong, also  known as ‘Lizard King’, who was arrested at the Kuala Lumpur  International Airport on Aug.  18 while on transit from  Penang to the Indonesian capital, Jakarta.     Said to be one of the biggest animal dealers in the  world, Wong pleaded guilty to the illegal export of 95 boa  constrictor pythons but was sentenced to only six months in  jail and fined 60,000 dollars.      Following an international outcry by conservationists,  state prosecutors appealed the verdict and sought heavier  penalties.    Malaysian Animal Rights Society president Surendran  Nagarajan described the light sentence as a 'big  embarrassment for our country'.     'Malaysia has allowed him (Wong) to use Penang as a base  and although reports were lodged with the police and the  Malaysian Anti-Corruption Commission, nothing was done,'  Nagarajan, a lawyer, said in an interview.   