With a recent study warning that the Caribbean could lose six  percent of its Gross Domestic Product annually to the ravages  of climate change, some experts say that a combination of  adaptation funding and risk pooling is the region's best hope  for the future. 'Climate risk insurance is already considered a critical  tool in any comprehensive framework aimed at effectively  adapting to the changing, and more changeable, climate,'  Milo Pearson, chair of the Caribbean Catastrophe Risk  Insurance Facility (CCRIF), told IPS. 'As the regional impacts of climate change become more  apparent in the future - with expectations of an increase in  extremes in weather patterns such as drought, extreme  rainfall events and an increase in greater magnitude  hurricanes - climate insurance will become even more  critical in addressing the enhanced risks associated with  these changes,' he said. The Caymans-based CCRIF is owned and operated by 16  Caribbean governments, and is the world's first and, to  date, only regional fund to provide earthquake and hurricane  coverage in the form of a set payment when disaster strikes.   A similar model is currently under discussion by Pacific  Island states, Pearson said. The facility's recent study, 'The Economics of Climate  Change Adaptation in the Caribbean', focused on eight  countries - Anguilla, Antigua and Barbuda, Barbados,  Bermuda, the Cayman Islands, Dominica, Jamaica and St.   Lucia. It found that annual expected losses from wind, storm surge  and inland flooding already amount to up to six percent of  GDP in some countries and that, in a worst case scenario,  losses could reach as high as nine percent, with wind the  single largest damage contributor. This is equivalent to the impact of a serious economic  recession — one that never ends, the study said. Expected losses from climate risks varied significantly  across the pilot countries, ranging from one percent of GDP  in Antigua and Barbuda to six percent in Jamaica.  The  differences were driven by various factors including  topography and exposure to coastal hazards, the economic  importance of particularly vulnerable sectors, and location. Among the hazards considered, hurricane-induced wind damage  has the largest damage potential, accounting for up to 90  percent of the overall damage, with coastal flooding and  storm surge most threatening in low-lying countries, the  study found. CCRIF said that the findings, which were released in late  August, provide a sound economic fact base that countries  can use to design their national climate adaptation and  disaster management strategies. Pearson said that the data can also help delegations prepare  for the Nov.  29-Dec.  10  Climate Change Conference in  Cancun, Mexico, where Caribbean and other small island  developing states will be seeking financial aid to carry out  mitigation and adaption plans. 'The current economic climate is one in which Caribbean  governments already find themselves facing serious  constraints with little fiscal space for climate adaptation  financing,' Pearson told IPS.  'Given these limited  resources, countries will need to be especially proactive in  sourcing financing for adaptation at the regional and  international level, and also within both the public and  private sectors. 'Edwin Carrington, the secretary general of the Caribbean  Community (CARICOM) grouping, calls CCRIF's research 'of  immense value to Caribbean policymakers and the business  sector in their efforts to develop and implement sound  adaptation strategies and plans'. He noted that the 'unequivocal' warming of the global  climate reported by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate  Change has already affected the Caribbean, with temperatures  increasing by about one degree C.  during the last century  and seas rising two to three millimetres per year since  1980. CARICOM countries 'need lasting adaptation strategies that  can help to provide security for the livelihood for our  citizens and protection against an ever changing climate',  Carrington stressed last month. Under the accord reached in Copenhagen last December, rich  countries promised $30 billion in 'fast start' financing —  money to assist developing nations to cope with climate  change that was supposed to be made rapidly available. Research by Project Catalyst of the ClimateWorks Foundation  and the European Climate Foundation  suggests that the  demand for money to support mitigation, adaptation and  reduced degradation of forests in the developing world will  be $21-54 billion over the next three years.  An additional  $100-190 billion in private sector investment will have to  be found each year. While competition for these funds is high, the CCRIF report  says risk mitigation initiatives have the potential to cost- effectively avert up to 90 percent of the expected losses in  2030, even under a severe climate change scenario. 'I have always called this short-term financing the golden  key to Cancun,' Christiana Figueres, head of the U. N.   Climate Change Secretariat, told a news conference earlier  this month to launch FastStartFinance. org, a website that  tracks climate change funding commitments from  industrialised countries. 'It is particularly urgent and important to have clarity  about the source, the allocation and the disbursement of the  short-term funds,' she said. The research by CCRIF, Pearson told IPS, can assist  countries in not only understanding the risks they face and  how to adapt to these risks, but also making a case in  Cancun and other ongoing discussions with the wider  international community on financing adaptation. He added that besides insurance pools, there have been  developments aimed at making insurance instruments available  at the sectoral level such as India's National Agricultural  Insurance Scheme, which covers more than 20 million farmers,  and the Weather-based Crop Insurance Scheme, covering more  than 600,000 farmers, which protect against poor harvests  caused by drought or frost. Similar initiatives are ongoing in Malawi, Thailand and  Central America, with CCRIF also involved in the exploration  of how similar mechanisms can be developed for the  Caribbean's agricultural sector. *This IPS story is part of a series supported by the Climate  and Development Knowledge Network - http://www. cdkn. org. 