Monsoon rains might have brought welcome relief to the  inhabitants of Inle Lake, but concerned Burmese groups — both  government and non-governmental organisations alike — are  rallying to preserve Burma’s second largest lake from drying  up again, as it did from earlier this year due to prolonged  drought.    At 900 metres above sea level, Inle Lake is a national  heritage site in the southern part of Shan State in Burma,  also known as Myanmar, and home to more than 170,000 people  in over 400 villages.  The lake is also a major source of  hydroelectric power for southern Burma, raising the stakes  for this South-east Asian country to keep the lake afloat.    In June to August, the lake’s water level fell to record  low levels, drying up the area and curtailing businesses,  water transport and residents’ everyday lives.  This was of  such concern that two workshops about the lake’s  rehabilitation were held in July, in Burma’s capital  Naypidaw and in Taung Gyi, Shan State, in July.  Burmese  Prime Minister Gen.  Thein Sein also visited Inle Lake on  Aug.  9 to survey the situation.   While the rains have eased somewhat the decline in Inle  Lake’s water level, residents have been keeping a close  watch on it, especially because October marks the time they  hold a pagoda festival and a boat race on the lake.    'Water level is now above 1. 2 metres and we hope that  would be enough water to hold regular boat races in the lake  like in previous years,' remarked an Inle resident who used  the join the boat race every year.    But  academics and government officials warn that the  double threat of declining water quality and shrinking water  mass could see Inle Lake vanishing in the near future.     According to a June 2010 report by Burma’s fishery  department in Shan State, pH levels of water collected from  different areas in the lake range from 8. 4 to 9. 6,  reflecting an above-average alkaline content that is killing  fish and causing them to migrate in search of safer  habitats.    Meanwhile, Inle Lake is shrinking rapidly due to soil  erosion, sedimentation and deforestation in the watershed  area.  According to official statistics released in 2010,  Inle Lake is now just 70 square kilometres wide, less than  half of the 163 sq km it spanned just three years ago.     Experts say water and soil conservation as well as forest  preservation need to be ramped up in the lake’s headwater  and watershed areas in order to save the lake from further  damage.  U Ohn, general secretary of the Forest Resource  Environment Development and Conservation Association, a  Burma-based group dedicated to environmental preservation,  takes heart from the fact that 300 people, including  officials and local residents, 'sat together and discussed  openly and sincerely about lake preservation issues' in the  Shan State seminar on Inle Lake.    Elderly Inle native Tun Yin says he has never seen the  lake face a worst crisis in the 80-odd years that he has  lived in the area.  'We could always row a boat to go from  place to place in the lake, but this summer we faced a big  trouble for transportation as water routes were blocked (due  to the) lack of water,' he says.      Long periods of drought and record-high 43. 5 degrees  Celsius temperatures during the summer months saw Inle  Lake’s water level drop to its lowest in 50 years, with  dried-up waterways forming new land routes in several areas.    'We couldn't use boats; we couldn't walk because of  marshland.  Even water for drinking and household use, we had  to go far to fetch it,' says Tun Yin's eldest daughter.    As water levels fell below 1. 2 metres for the first time  in five decades, Inle Lake residents built makeshift bridges  in their villages as they could no longer travel by boat.   Needless to say, the majority of the residents, comprising  fishermen and farmers, were badly affected.    One of Burma’s most popular tourist spots because of its  beauty and the many ancient pagodas and monasteries around  it, visitor arrivals to Inle Lake also slowed to a trickle,  putting at risk local businesses including hotels, weaving  factories and goldsmiths that survive on tourist traffic.    Some hotels built on stilts around the lake had to cease  operation during the summer, as boats were unable to access  the buildings.  Other business owners hired dredgers to  remove the build-up of silt that had blocked water passages  leading to their shops.     Experts say commercial floating firms, who do agriculture  on 'floating lands', are the main culprits behind water  pollution — which compounds the problem for Inle Lake —  because of their excessive use of chemical fertilisers and  pesticides.     Floating lands are thick layers of seaweed and water  hyacinth that have piled up and hardened, on which  vegetation can be grown and houses can be built.  These  floating lands can be cut up and moved around across the  water, and are even traded like normal plots of land.   Yet, environmentalist U Ohn says, many farmers using these  floating lands are 'not aware of (the environmental  degradation that) is happening in the lake'.    'This is their livelihood.  We can't disturb their  livelihood but we might need to use law enforcement to  certain extent (to protect the environment),' says U Ohn.   'We can't just ban chemical fertiliser and pesticide usage.   We have to replace them with biofertiliser and give (the  farmers) incentives and (better) practices to follow. '  