'Sometimes, for a day or two we don't even have bread, nor flour to make bread.   There's a store nearby that, when we are truly desperate, lets us take a bag of  bread or something simple, on credit.  I owe them a lot of money for the food I've  brought from them, but I still can't pay them. 'Umm Khamis Khattab, 52, lives in a single, bare-bones room in central  Gaza's Bureij refugee camp.  Khamis, her disabled son, 30, is married but has  no source of income.  'Our situation is very bad.  We used to receive financial support because my  son is disabled.  Now, we get nothing.  After my husband died five years ago,  his family tried to help us, for a short while.  But they can't take care of  themselves, let alone us,' says the widow.  'So we get by on hand-outs from  neighbours now and then. 'Umm Khamis tries to generate an income selling eggs from the handful of  chickens she tends.  'We are three people living off 20 shekels (roughly five  dollars) per week from the eggs. 'The World Food Programme (WFP) and Food and Agriculture Organisation  (FAO) define food insecurity as people not having 'adequate physical, social  or economic access to sufficient, safe and nutritious food which meets their  dietary needs. 'Palestinians vulnerable to food insecurity are further defined as 'households  with both income and consumption below 5. 6 dollars per adult equivalent per  day. ' Actual food insecure households are defined as having 'an income and  consumption below 4. 7 dollars per adult equivalent per day. 'In the Gaza Strip, where unemployment levels soar up to 65 percent, and more  than 80 percent people are food aid dependent,  the average income per day  per person is just two dollars.  According to the WFP and FAO, the food  insecure in Gaza are an alarming 61 percent, with another 16 percent  vulnerable to food insecurity.  'I'd be happy just selling things on the street if it brought five shekels per  day,' says Abu Suleiman, 51, father of four.  He, his wife and their young  children live in Sheik Radwan, north of Gaza City, in a windowless, concrete  block room, the kind that is ordinarily used as a space for small shops. 'We all sleep together in this room, which is our kitchen and bathroom as  well,' he says.  The building owner uses the room next door for his sheep and chickens.  'The  stench is incredible, we can't escape it.  And I worry about my children's  health, but there's nowhere better we can go. 'Abu Suleiman works making tea and coffee and cleaning the office of a media  group in Gaza.  'I work from 7am to 4:30pm and earn just 350 shekels per  month,' he says.  'The rent for our room is 150 shekels per month, so that  leaves just 200 shekels to get by on. ' He says he walks the hour both ways to  work in order to avoid taxi fares.  'But 200 shekels isn't enough for five people and a baby.  If I even thought  about buying meat, the money would be gone quickly.  So we buy cheaper  food: rice, lentils, pasta.  Never meat. 'With food prices highly inflated under the siege Israel has imposed on Gaza  since shortly after Hamas's election in 2006, few families can afford meats,  fish, or fresh produce.  The 2008-2009 Israeli war on Gaza further destroyed  meat and poultry production besides devastating the agricultural sector. Ten percent of poultry and 17 percent of cattle and ruminants were killed.   Eighteen percent of Gaza's productive agricultural lands were destroyed,  along with another 17 percent of greenhouse-grown vegetables, says the  United Nations (UN). The combination of this agricultural destruction and the mortal Israeli  imposition of a no-go zone on Gaza's border lands, encompassing roughly  one-third of Gaza's arable land means that as of June 2009, 46 percent of  agricultural land in Gaza was either inaccessible or out of production,  impacting on the availability of fresh and nutritious produce in the Strip and  affecting over 60,000 people earning a living from agriculture alone. At the same time, fishers are no longer able to breach more than miles, most  usually staying within less than a mile of Gaza's shores.   While the Oslo  accords granted Gazan fishermen the right to fish 20 nautical miles off Gaza 's coast, Israel has incrementally and violently reduced the fishing limits.   The FAO reports a decline in total fishing catch by 47 percent between 2008  and 2009, with fishers subject to daily shooting from Israeli gunboats in  Gazan water. 'Every day in Gaza, more and more people become hungry, more new people  come for help,' says Dr.  Al-Wahaidi, Director of Health for Ard al-Insan,  Gaza's prime centre for the hungry and malnourished.  'And there's no  difference between city dwellers and camp residents, except that maybe camp  families have more of a social network to rely on, and country residents have  more possibilities for growing produce for themselves. ' According to Amani Jouda, Nutrition Officer for the World Health  Orgnanisation (WHO) in Gaza, 74 percent of children aged 9-12 months are  anaemic, up from 65 percent in 2009, as are another 32 percent of children  aged 7-15 years, and 45 percent of pregnant women in their first months of  pregnancy.  The UN Millennium Project Hunger Task Force cites the importance of local  agriculture and livestock in reducing hunger.  Ard al-Insan's Dr.  Al-Wahaidi sees it clearly.  'The main reason for hunger in  Gaza is Israeli politics on the people Gaza.  Gaza is different than other places.   When we have a disaster, we cannot leave our small piece of land to find work  or safety elsewhere.   We are trapped inside. '  