Scientists are closely examining the reefs of this island just  north of Venezuela to determine why it has escaped the  devastation that wiped out 85 percent of the Caribbean's  corals since the 1970s. Just in the past 30 years, coral cover in the Caribbean has  gone from a healthy 65 percent to perhaps 20 percent.  New  diseases and algae invasions have wiped out much of the  corals that stretch from the southeastern U. S.  state of  Florida, where the coral cover is tiny, to Bonaire, where a  good portion of those last 20 percent is located.  The  Caribbean coast of Central America is equally damaged.  Warmer, more acidic oceans predicted for the future because  of climate change are expected to wreak even more  devastation on the survivors.  When the water gets too warm,  the corals appear to beach and then usually die. Though the Persian Gulf suffered a similar fate, mostly  because of oil pollution, the Caribbean is by far the  largest region to have lost most of its corals, which are  colonies of tiny, individual animals that, like farmers,  live off equally tiny algae. 'This means millions of people are losing an abundant supply  of cheap, nutritious fish,' explains Andrew Bruckner, chief  scientist of the Washington-based Khaled bin Sultan Living  Oceans Foundation.  In addition, he and other scientist say,  corals are used for building materials, protection from  waves and to attract tourists. Bonaire, in contrast, enjoys exceptionally clear water,  which has made it a diving Mecca since the 1970s.  In a  classic virtuous circle, the local government has  successfully restricted fishing to keep the fish and coral  reefs in good shape and the free-spending recreational  divers coming.  Still, diseases prevalent all over the Caribbean have almost  wiped out the elkhorn and staghorn corals that once carpeted  Bonaire's shallowest parts, just off the beach, and provided  habitat for myriad edible fish and crustaceans.  A little deeper, many of the massive star corals, key  building blocks of reefs, have suffered the same fate, but  quite a few are still alive. On a recent morning in Bonaire, Bruckner, a coral scientist,  laden with a scuba tank, a clipboard and measuring devices,  wades into the water off one of Bonaire's deserted,  unspoiled beaches, known to divers as Taylor Made. He is leading a team of a dozen colleagues on a week-long  expedition to count dead and healthy corals, along with fish  populations.  Under water, Bruckner points to some of the  last staghorns.  Then we reach some giant star corals, up to  six metres high, that are between 500 and 1,000 years old  and he raises his thumb: they are olive green and healthy.  A little farther, other star corals are half olive green,  half brown, separated by a whitish line.  It's called white  plague disease, one of a family of pathologies that have  decimated Caribbean corals.  Bruckner gives a thumbs-down.   But on many of the dead corals, he points to little lumps of  live coral on the dead parts: thumbs-up again. Back on the pebble beach, Bruckner takes off his mask and  remarks, 'What we're seeing here is a reef that's suffered  from disease and bleaching, but the new corals tell us the  reef is rebounding fast. 'That's because there are still enough algae-eating fish  around to keep the surface of the dead corals clean.  It  helps that there's very little rain here and that  hurricanes, which damage reefs, are rare.  In the rest of the  Caribbean, dead coral soon are covered with algae and the  coral larvae have nowhere to settle, so after a hurricane,  very little grows back. But in Bonaire, Bruckner says far that far less degradation  had occurred since 2005, when he last surveyed the island's  reef, than in the rest of the Caribbean in the same period. Fishermen and polluters are only the most tangible killers  of corals.  But as the Earth gets warmer, hot-water spells  wipe out entire reefs.  The first major temperature spike  came in 1998, and most Caribbean reefs never recovered.  This  year promises to be the hottest since 1998 in the Caribbean,  and some coral die-offs have already been observed. And if warmer water, a lack of algae-eaters and pollution  were not enough, there's another enemy lurking in the  future: ocean acidification.  As the carbon dioxide in the  atmosphere has increased by a third in the past two  centuries, a third of that increase has been absorbed by the  oceans.  The result is that ocean water is now more acidic  than it was, which makes it harder for corals to build their  skeletons. The effects are already being felt.  'In the Great Barrier  Reef, the calcification rate has slowed 15 percent since  1990,' says Ove Hoegh-Gulberg, a coral biologist at the  University of Queensland, Australia. 'Very few corals will survive this century and they will be  in very bad shape,' adds Ken Caldeira of the Carnegie  Institution. But Bruckner is more optimistic.  'The historical record  shows corals are pretty adaptable,' he says over dinner at  the divers' hotel.  'If we can restrict fishing and pollution  and create more marine reserves, I think we can save some of  the Caribbean's coral reefs.  But even if we don't, in places  like the remote Pacific islands, I think the more vulnerable  coral species will die off and be replaced by tougher ones.   I just don't see them dying off completely. '*This story is part of a series of features on biodiversity  by IPS, CGIAR/Biodiversity International, IFEJ and UNEP/CBD,  members of Communicators for Sustainable Development  (http://www. complusalliance. org). 