A natural gas explosion in San Bruno, California that almost  decimated an entire city earlier this month has fuelled  concerns about the outdated, aging, and dangerous gas  pipelines that underlie many U. S.  cities. Television stations across the U. S.  broadcast dramatic  images of firefighters spraying water on the gigantic fires  which followed the explosion on Sep.  9 and destroyed 37  homes, killed eight people, and injured over 50 others. 'A full investigation must take place in the coming days to  determine the cause of this horrible accident, and the  National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) has already  dispatched a team to California,' Speaker of the U. S.  House,  Rep.  Nancy Pelosi, said in a statement.   The NTSB is investigating the cause of the ruptured Pacific  Gas & Electric pipeline, which is still unknown.   However,  residents of San Bruno complained of smelling a gas leak for  weeks, and another PG&E pipeline explosion in suburban  Sacramento, California, had occurred only months earlier  with no citation against the company. Natural gas is used by 165 million homes and businesses  through a 2. 3-million-mile distribution and transmission  pipeline delivery system, which supporters say is  overwhelmingly reliable.  But some public officials are  worried. 'The recent explosion of a gas pipeline illustrates how  dangerous these pipelines are,' Georgia State Sen.  Vincent  Fort wrote in a letter to Georgia Public Service Commission  Member Chuck Eaton, requesting a study.  'Since 1990, more  than 2,800 gas pipeline accidents have been reported, with  over a third causing death. ' 'As you know, the issue of natural gas pipeline safety has  become critical in my district since Georgia Power is  placing a 36 inch natural gas pipeline in the heart of many  neighbourhoods,' Fort wrote. Most pipeline incidents are due to digging by builders,  cable companies, and utilities, while others are caused by  pipeline corrosion, operator errors, and equipment  malfunctions. The California disaster also raised questions about lack of  government oversight of the natural gas industry. An investigation by the New York Times found the number of  fines issued by the federal agency in charge of pipeline  oversight, the Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety  Administration, has decreased by 40 percent since 2004.   A  third of all enforcement cases opened during the past eight  years had not been resolved, with some unresolved cases  dating back to the 1990s. The newspaper reported that the state of Georgia had only  been able to collect on half of the fines it issues.    Georgia allows companies to take a training course instead  of paying a fine for a first violation. And even when fines are paid, they are typically so minimal  that they do not deter companies from further violations. Bill Edge with the Georgia Public Services Commission told  IPS it does have trouble getting some companies to pay  fines, usually involving construction companies that are  insolvent or go out of business.   Many of these companies  failed to contact the state before digging in the ground to  ensure they do not hit a pipeline. Georgia has been more proactive than other states in  replacing aging pipelines, although ratepayers saw an  increase in their energy bills to pay for the repairs. 'We've replaced over 90 percent.   We have eight  inspectors. . .  inspecting pipes.   We're doing all we can to  ensure the pipes are safe in Georgia,' Edge said, adding,  'We can't guarantee we won't have another incident. 'Georgia paid the state's largest gas utility, Atlanta Gas  Light (AGL), to replace 2,000 miles of pipe over 12 years.    The programme was instituted in the 1990s after the PSC  documented over 20,000 gas leaks across the state, including  at the State Capitol building. To date, AGL still has some 344 miles of old pipelines that  need to be replaced, mostly in Atlanta. And that should be a concern for residents.   The San Bruno  pipeline is one which 'was designated in 2007 to be a high- risk section with an 'unacceptably high' potential of  failure and was scheduled for replacement by 2013,'  according to Stan Wise, a member of the Georgia Public  Service Commission. Meanwhile, in the state of Oregon, activists are fighting  600 miles of new natural gas pipelines which would carry  liquified natural gas (LNG).   LNG is natural gas brought  over in liquid form, on ships from overseas, from countries  like Russia, Indonesia, and Qatar. 'It's a 36-inch [thick] pipeline with non-odorised gas at a  pressure that is seven times the San Bruno pipeline that  exploded earlier this month,' Olivia Schmidt, a community  organiser with the Anti-LNG Coalition, told IPS. 'When they [citizens of Oregon] learned about this horrible  tragedy in the Bay Area, it heightened concerns already  there about public safety,' Schmidt said. The Anti-LNG Coalition is pushing for safe, renewable  alternatives to heating homes and businesses, such as solar  and wind energy. 'Now that we've seen this horrible disaster - which is one  of many in the U. S.  - why are we putting ourselves at risk  for this?' Schmidt said. In Oregon, she said, 'The conversation is not how do we fix  and upgrade existing infrastructure, but how do we generate  an economy around cleaner sources of fuel which will serve  us better in the future?'