Beyond Copenhagen and Cancún, a different climate debate has  been brewing.  The outcome of this debate, however, will affect  far more than the climate, and that is precisely why it is so  contentious. As many countries continue to refuse to cap their greenhouse  gas emissions and climate change-induced emergencies become  increasing likely — or frequent — some researchers are  saying it is time to seriously look in to developing a plan  B for stopping climate change.  This plan B would consist of  'geoengineering' whereby carbon dioxide is removed from the  atmosphere, the amount of solar radiation heating the planet  is reduced, or both. There are several proposals that fit into these broad  categories, and they vary greatly both in terms of their  acceptance and in the likely feasibility that they can be  done on a large enough scale.  For now, though, the plans are  still largely thin on specifics and relegated to the  outskirts of climate discussions. That is especially true for the category of geoengineering  called solar radiation management, or SRM.  This category  includes, in decreasing order of likely feasibility at a  large scale, according to researcher David Keith, spraying  aerosols high in the atmosphere, whitening marine clouds,  placing satellites with mirrors in space, and whitening the  surface of the oceans. The other category of geoengineering fixes, carbon dioxide  removal (CRM), includes such accepted measures as planting  forests to serve as carbon sinks or burning biomass in place  of fossil fuels like coal.  More novel CRM approaches would  include growing large amounts of algae from which a biofuel  can then be derived and, most controversially, sprinkling  minerals like iron or limestone over parts of the ocean. Researchers like Keith, an environmental scientist at the  University of Calgary and leading geoengineering thinker,  are quick to note that these technical solutions to climate  change should not be thought of as substitutes for reducing  greenhouse gas emissions.  They also note that most of these technologies are not close  to ready for deployment and that more than anything further  research is needed to determine both what adverse  consequences such technical solutions might have and whether  these solutions even work — that is, whether they can really  be thought of as a plan B. For now, many fears remain over the possible ecological  implications of engineering the planet's climate.  And these  scientific issues, as well as political and legal issues,  will need to be sorted out if research in the field is going  to advance much further. Brad Allenby, a professor of engineering and ethics at  Arizona State University, is concerned that a single-minded  focus on solving climate change might overlook possible  spill-over effects of those solutions on other phenomena,  such as weather patterns or the nitrogen cycle. 'These are important technologies but we need to understand  a lot more, particularly about scale…When do I put enough  material into the stratosphere that I change monsoon  patterns?' Allenby said at a conference here Monday. He says we need to stop thinking of geoengineering measures  as solely 'climate-change technologies'. 'Climate change is part of the sweep of issues that need to  be dealt with.  These issues are not going to decouple just  because we don't think we're smart enough to understand the  coupling,' he said. Beyond these conceptual and ecological problems, this  potential technology also poses thorny questions for  international law and governance. Jason Blackstock, an international governance fellow at the  Vienna-based International Institute for Applied Systems  Analysis, thinks that the deployment of geoengineering  technologies might ultimately come down to political  narratives and unilateral action.  A developing country that  feels it is being slighted by the lack of action on  emissions reductions by the wealthy countries that have  contributed the most to climate change might decide to  undertake some geoengineering measure itself, he says. 'If I had to place a bet now, I would give at least even  odds that [the country that deploys geoengineering measures  first] won't be the U. S.  and that it would more likely be an  emerging economy simply because of the alignment of politics  and incentive structure,' both in the U. S.  and in emerging  economies, he says. There is also the prospect of private corporations or  individuals using geoengineering technology to combat  climate change on their own.  But, as Dan Bodansky, a  professor of law, ethics and sustainability at Arizona State  University, pointed out Monday, 'It wouldn't be a single  act; it would be a continuous activity over time, which, I  assume, would be possible to detect and respond to,' making  it difficult for geoengineering measures to be taken without  the knowledge of governments. Still, many questions would remain, Bodansky says, including  who has jurisdiction and what governments or entities should  respond. The other fear is political: if geoengineering options  become readily available, would the incentive to  significantly reduce emissions still exist?But Blackstone says that incentive works two ways.  It is  conceivable, he says, that by 2015 geoengineering options  could be used as a negotiation tactic in global climate  summits like last year's in Copenhagen and this year's in  Cancún. Island states or other countries that face an existential  threat from rising seas, for instance, could band together  and 'build a little red button and go to the negotiations  and say, 'Are you guys going to mitigate? Well, I have a red  button to inject sulphur aerosols [into the atmosphere,  expected to reflect solar radiation].  Are you guys going to  mitigate now?'' says Blackstone. For now, Keith and other geoengineering researchers are just  hoping there will be further research into both the  technologies and the contentious questions it raises. They admit their planet-scale measures have large risks, but  also know that the time may come when the risk of climate  change-induced emergencies outweighs the risks that  geoengineering may bring - and hope they have answered  enough of the questions about the technologies that it is  known whether it has a role to play in staving off the worst  of climate change's effects. 