The march toward domesticating the last wild food source may be about to take  a major step forward in Washington - for better or worse. Following a series of hearings last week the U. S.  government’s Food and Drug  Administration (FDA) is considering whether to approve for human  consumption a genetically engineered species of Atlantic salmon. The debate here has focused on whether raising this salmon in aquaculture  operations would pose a hazard to human or environmental health.  However  that debate turns out, though - and the FDA has already decided the fish is  safe to eat - the genetic modification of a fish to make it easier and more  efficient to raise for human consumption is a significant milestone in the  ongoing, and contentious, effort to expand aquaculture to feed a growing  population. Fish farming - which produced only one million tonnes of fish in 1950 - has  since emerged as an 80 billion dollar-industry producing over five times that  amount of fish with operations around the world, and that acceleration is  primed to start moving even faster. Meanwhile, over a billion people depend on fish for the protein in their diets,  and with the human population booming that number is set to rise.  A large  part of that population is also becoming more affluent, and thus eating more  and more of the predatory fish - like salmon - that advanced-economy  consumers tend to prefer. In that sense, the development of a faster-growing, more farm-friendly  salmon seems almost inevitable. It took generations and generations to breed land animals like cattle and  sheep into the domesticated food sources we know today.  But, through  genetic engineering, in just the time it took for research and testing, a  company called AquaBounty has developed a salmon - called the  AquAdvantage salmon - that reaches its full size in half the time a normal  salmon takes, with the help of a gene from the Pacific salmon and a gene  promoter from the ocean pout. Food safety groups see something decidedly fishy about this interference with  natural processes, but it looks more than likely that the GE fish will eventually  be in U. S.  grocery stores.  This raises several interesting issues in the context  of the growth of aquaculture. Much more dangerous than the spectre of a GE salmon escaping into the wild  - AquaBounty has said its salmon will all be sterile females and grown in  inland tanks - are the other difficulties associated with farming salmon  sustainably. Some fish, like tilapia, are well suited to being domesticated and raised in a  farm setting.  Others, like salmon, are much less so.  While producing farmed  salmon takes some pressure off depleted wild populations, salmon, which are  carnivorous, require large amounts of feed to grow, and feed fish are taken  from the wild at increasingly unsustainable rates. Yet salmon remains one of the most popular fish among consumers - a  popularity that is beyond what wild populations can sustain.  Rather than  searching for other, more aquaculture-appropriate species to fill that  demand, then, it seems AquaBounty has decided to make salmon a bit more  aquaculture-friendly. Typically, three pounds of feed fish is required to produce one pound of  farmed salmon.  Since AquAdvantage salmon grow faster and thus have  shorter life spans, they would presumably require less food - AquaBounty  says that its fish will require 10 percent less food per pound of salmon  produced. But feed conversation ratios, the amount of feed needed to produce a pound  of farmed fish, is not the only obstacle to raising salmon sustainably - even  leaving ecological and ethical concerns over genetic modification aside. The ocean pens in which most farmed salmon are raised are notorious for  allowing large quantities of antibiotics and additives leak out and damage the  surrounding environment, as well as leading to farmed salmon escaping and  potentially spreading disease to and contaminating the gene pool of wild  salmon. But AquaBounty maintains that their faster-growing fish will 'enhance the  economic viability' of operations that raise salmon inland, thus mitigating  these potential pollution and escape problems. The say their efforts, which also include work on transgenic trout and tilapia,  are helping to build a more efficient and sustainable aquaculture industry. In any case, it is becoming clear that GE animals may have an increasingly  large part to play in feeding a crowded planet.  Randall Lutter, a visiting  scholar at the think tank Resources for the Future and former FDA official,  points to the 'enviro-pig' said to be under consideration at the FDA which  would have very low levels of phosphorous in its waste and thus help mitigate  the pollution associated with run-off from pig facilities.  A GE cow resistant to  mad cow disease is also said to be under review. Though no country has yet approved a GE animal to be sold for human  consumption, Lutter thinks approval of the AquAdvantage salmon might open  a path.  'Genetic engineering of farm animals, if regulated in a manner that  adequately protects animal health and food safety and preserves incentives  for research and development, offers the promise of low-cost solutions to a  number of social and economic problems,' he says. Some consumer groups fear that the reviews of the possible health and  environmental effects of the GE salmon were not thorough enough.  They point  out that the data related to the salmon shows that up to five percent of the  GE eggs produced might be fertile. Possibly of more pressing concern to feeding a growing population with a  dwindling supply of fish, though, is the argument that we simply should not  be relying on farming salmon.  'We all know there is a great appetite for  salmon, but the solution is not to ‘farm’ genetically-engineered versions to  put more on our dinner tables; the solution is to work to bring our wild  salmon populations back,' says Jonathan Rosenfield, a conservation biologist  and president of the SalmonAID Foundation, a coalition of commercial, tribal  and conservation interests.  'The approval of these transgenic fish will only  exacerbate the problems facing our wild fisheries. '