Proponents of renewable energy say that a planned large-scale  solar power plant in Australia’s northern Victoria state,  which will produce enough output to provide electricity to  60,000 homes, is just a fraction of what could be achieved if  federal and state governments were fully committed to  harnessing solar energy.    The proposed 180-megawatt Mallee Solar Park power  station, to be built near the town of Mildura — some 550  kilometres northwest of Melbourne — will become the largest  of its kind in Australia upon its anticipated completion  date in 2015.   Belonging to TRUenergy, one of Australia’s largest energy  companies, the project recently received the financial  backing of the Victorian Government, which committed 100  million Australian dollars (96. 6 million U. S.  dollars) in  late September to the Mallee Solar Park.    'Together with Victorians, we are rising to the challenge  of climate change by driving new initiatives to cut  emissions and create a cleaner, greener future for Victorian  families,' state premier John Brumby said on Sep.  21.    Solar generated electricity, along with other renewable  sources like wind and hydro, is increasingly being viewed as  a potential major power generator as countries around the  world look to transition to low-carbon economies.     But even with the state government’s financial support,  TRUenergy still requires federal dollars to proceed.  'The  eventuality of the Mallee Solar Park project is only  feasible with the support of both the state and federal  governments,' says Richard McIndoe, TRUenergy’s managing  director.    The Mallee Solar Park, which will use solar photovoltaic  technology, has been shortlisted alongside three other  prospective solar photovoltaic power stations and four solar  thermal projects for financial backing as part of the  federal government’s 1. 5 billion Australian dollar (1. 45  billion U. S.  dollar) Solar Flagships Programme (SFP).     Photovoltaic plants convert the sun’s radiation directly  into electricity, while solar thermal technology generates  electricity by using steam from solar-heated water to drive  a turbine.    Under the SFP, one solar photovoltaic project and one  proposed solar thermal plant will be selected to receive  federal funding, with the recipients to be announced in the  first half of 2011.    The SFP is a section of the federal government’s Clean  Energy Initiative, a 5. 1 billion Australian dollar (4. 92  billion U. S.  dollar) programme that also includes funds for  other renewable and 'clean coal' technologies.     In total, 52 proposals were entered for SFP funding.  Tony  Mohr, from the Australian Conservation Foundation, told IPS  that this represents an 'astounding response' to the  programme, which he argues should be expanded in order to  realise Australia’s potential to generate solar power.    'Australia has much more abundant solar energy than  pretty much any other developed country or continent,' says  Mohr.    'Germany is a world leader in solar power but it has half  as much sun per square metre as Australia,' he adds.    Solar energy remains a largely untapped resource in  Australia.  According to the Australian Energy Resource  Assessment, solar energy accounts for only 0. 1 percent of  total primary energy consumption here as well as globally.     And solar power is in direct competition with coal- generated electricity.    Australia has an estimated nine percent of the world’s  total coal reserves and is the largest exporter of coal,  feeding demand for coal-fired power stations in China, India  and other developing countries.     Despite the burning of coal resulting in large amounts of  greenhouse gas emissions, three quarters of Australia’s  electricity is also sourced from coal.     Environmentalists argue that political will, rather than  technological feasibility and cost, is the key obstacle in  overcoming Australia’s reliance on coal.    For the Victorian Government, backing the Mallee Solar  Park project is part of its action plan — contained in its  Climate Change White Paper, released in July — to tackle  greenhouse gas emissions in Victoria, which it has committed  to cutting by at least 20 percent by 2020.     The Brumby government also intends to support the  development of between five and 10 large-scale solar power  stations in Victoria over the next decade in order to reach  its target of solar generated electricity accounting for  five percent of the state’s output by 2020.    Mark Wakeham, campaigns director for local green  organisation Environment Victoria, describes the state’s  target as 'really encouraging for large-scale solar' but is  highly critical of plans for a new coal-fired power station  to be built in Victoria.    The state’s Environment Protection Agency (EPA) has  received a works approval application from Dual Gas, a  subsidiary of the Australian-owned energy company HRL, for a  600-megawatt plant in the Latrobe Valley east of Melbourne.     While China National Electrical Corp, a state-owned  Chinese company, has already signed on to build the proposed  plant, Wakeham wants both the EPA and the Brumby government  to block the development.    'Building a polluting coal-fired power station that’s  going to operate until 2040 or 2050 is madness and should  not be approved,' he told IPS.    Besides being 'inconsistent' with the state’s emissions  reduction target, the project 'would be inconsistent with  the Climate Change White Paper which started to map out a  pathway for cleaning up Victoria’s energy supply, including  a plan to replace one quarter of Hazelwood (power station),'  said Wakeham.    The coal-fired Hazelwood Power Station, also located in  Victoria’s Latrobe Valley, provides up to 25 percent of the  state’s electricity.  The plant’s owner, International Power  Australia, rejects claims by environmentalists that it is  Australia’s dirtiest power plant.    But activists from the Switch Off Hazelwood protest group  are adamant that it be shut down, with a rally outside the  plant’s gates planned for the International Day of Climate  Action on Oct.  10.  