Agua Negra Pass today is an unpaved road that connects Argentina and Chile at  4,800 metres above sea level.  But it is only open in the southern hemisphere  summer months -- December to March -- and then only to lightweight vehicles. The rest of the year, Agua Negra is closed due to ice and snowstorms.  'Along  some stretches there is just one lane, it's very dangerous, the road breaks up,  and there is always the risk of tire blowouts,' said attorney Silvia Villalonga, of  the Foundation of Independent Citizens from the northwestern Argentine  province of San Juan. Currently, the main border crossing between the two nations separated by the  Andes is Los Libertadores tunnel, joining the western Argentine province of  Mendoza and the central Chilean region of Valparaíso, at 3,200 metres above  sea level.  Around 2,500 trucks pass through each day. But that tunnel closes without warning due to snowstorms, and thousands of  trucks -- and their drivers and cargo -- are left stranded on either side of the  border. In this context emerged the proposal to build a tunnel through the Andes  further north, at Agua Negra.  The Argentine and Chilean governments are in  favour, while civil society organisations are demanding transparency and a  place at the negotiating table. 'Having a tunnel could be very valuable for San Juan Province, but we have to  look very closely at the costs and benefits,' Villalonga told Tierramérica. The planned tunnel to connect San Juan with the Chilean region of Coquimbo  is also a key component for the 'Bioceanic Corridor' that would run from the  port city of Coquimbo on the Pacific to the southern Brazilian city of Porto  Alegre, near the Atlantic. At the 39th summit of the Southern Common Market (Mercosur), held in San  Juan in August, the presidents of the bloc's countries (Argentina, Brazil,  Paraguay and Uruguay) and Chile, as an associate member, gave clear support  to the project, which promises greater integration and improved flow of  regional commerce. But local citizens groups have their doubts. 'The San Juan government says it has feasibility studies of the route, but they  were done without any participation by civil society, so there is no  transparency in what is being evaluated,' said Villalonga. The Foundation of Independent Citizens is not opposed to the tunnel itself.   But its members are asking for participation in planning construction in areas  near glaciers, which are important reserves of freshwater in this arid region. 'We expect an environmental impact statement available to citizens in a public  hearing so we can be involved and know where they want to dig the tunnel,  whether the glaciers to be sacrificed are important or not, because everything  depends on the tunnel's location -- and we don't know where that is,'  explained the attorney. Architect Alicia Malmod, of the National University of San Juan, told  Tierramérica that the project is 'necessary' because 'it provides a strategic  alternative for development of the province in terms of integration and  exchange opportunities. 'Malmod does not see the tunnel as an isolated project, but as part of the  inter-ocean route, which is an axis of the Initiative for the Integration of  Regional Infrastructure in South America (IIRSA), an inter-governmental  mechanism of the 12 nations of South America for promoting transportation,  energy and communications projects. The IIRSA plan is for an international tunnel at a cost of 800 million dollars.   The Brazilian Bureau de Projetos e Consultoria is in charge of the technical  studies needed to bid on the project, which is to begin in 2014 and would  take four years to complete. For a long time, said Malmod, 'Argentina's central-west region, and San Juan  in particular, has been the backyard, the backside of a country that only  looked outwards.  A project of this magnitude would redefine this area, with  new roles and resource potential,' she said. The tunnel will generate 'local development' with the construction of  settlements with services that would improve the quality of life of the area's  inhabitants. In particular, the departments of Jáchal and Iglesia could reinforce their  identity as regional centres and preserve their cultural heritage, said the  architect. But Malmod is also wary of the project's potentially negative impacts,  stressing that greater citizen participation is necessary to prevent them. 'We have a particularly fragile system because of the aridness and seismic  activity.  But in a broader environmental view, the social fragility is an  unavoidable component,' when considering costs and benefits, she said. Also under way in the border and glacier area of San Juan is mining activity,  which also 'needs debate, discussion of legislation, environmental regulations  and monitoring agencies,' she said. According to the San Juan Chamber of Mining, there are 26 projects in the  province in different phases of development: one is already in operation, five  with approved feasibility reports, and 20 are in the exploration stage.  Most  are along or near Argentina's border with Chile. The most controversial is Pascua Lama, of the Canadian firm Barrick Gold.   Environmentalists charge that it is damaging the glaciers. On Sep.  30, the Argentine Congress passed a law to protect glaciers by  establishing limits and controls for infrastructure and mining projects in  glacier areas. In San Juan, says Malmod, what is needed is a land use and regulation plan  specific to this zone. (*This story was originally published by Latin American newspapers that are  part of the Tierramérica network.  Tierramérica is a specialised news service  produced by IPS with the backing of the United Nations Development  Programme, United Nations Environment Programme and the World Bank. ) 