The cultivation in several Cuban provinces of genetically modified maize,  obtained by the Centre for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, endangers  biodiversity and contradicts the government's own agricultural production plan,  warns Cuban agro-ecologist Fernando Funes-Monzote. In September, Funes-Monzote coordinated a meeting of experts concerned  about transgenics with board and staff members from the National Centre for  Biological Security and the Office of Environmental Regulation, one of the  institutions entrusted with licensing genetically modified (GM) crops.  The experts issued a statement calling for a moratorium on GM crops until  more information is available and society has a chance to debate their  environmental and health effects.  The meeting was seen as the first official space open to a segment of Cuba's  scientific community's concerns about the release of GM organisms into the  agricultural system of this Caribbean island nation. Q: Cultivation of this genetically modified variety, FR-Btl, began in 2008, but  opinions against it predate that.  Why has it taken until now to ask for a  moratorium in order to analyse the advantages and disadvantages?  A: The issue was silenced, but in 2008 the alarm was sounded when this  maize was planted as a test crop: one hectare that would give way to the  planting of 50 hectares, as a prelude to the expansion of the crop in 2009 to  6,000 hectares across several provinces. Until that moment, it was thought that the work with GM organisms would be  kept in the laboratories until there was proof that they would not harm the  environment or human health. We now believe that a moratorium would provide the time necessary to make  better-informed decisions and to reflect on the matter, with the participation  of the public.  Those who think this is a problem exclusive to science and that  those in power have the last word are mistaken.  Q: Do you think standards and regulations have been violated?  A: The precautionary principle is being violated.  That is, there is no visible,  public information that allows us to know that all precautions were taken.  We  are starting from the fact that those who made the decision could have made  mistakes. This year is a crucial time for reconsidering the expansion and maintenance  of this crop because the permit granted by the Office of Regulation expires.   But we have been told that it is not in their power to issue a moratorium and  that the decision to release this variety of maize had a technical component as  well as a political component. Q: Is it possible to halt a process that appears to be quite advanced already?  A: A moratorium would allow for a process of public consultation and debate.   There is a political decision as well as a political risk, because Cuba is being  seen as a promoter of transgenics that the progressive world opposes.  And it is not only opposed because of the control of the transnational  corporations, but also because of the technology's impacts on agriculture,  which can have adverse effects for the population and threatens the fragile  biological balance.  Q: How much has been planted of this variety of maize, which is resistant to  the armyworm (Spodoptera frugiperda) and to herbicides? In what conditions  has it been cultivated?  A: They haven't reported this year's total.  According to the permit, they can  cultivate the FR-Btl variety in fields from Havana to Camagüey (534  kilometres away).  Pinar del Río in the west and the eastern region are  excluded, but who can assure us that the seeds have not crossed provincial  borders?We don't know the results or how many areas were planted in total.  There was  a meeting at the National Centre for Biological Security to report on the  results of the first year of planting, but there is no written record.   Undoubtedly there has been a lack of transparency in this process, which is a  matter for all society.  Q: But have you and other experts been able to directly observe in the  countryside how this GM maize is developing?  A: From what I saw in Sancti Spíritus (a central province), I can affirm that the  biological security guidelines are not being taken into account.  In other words,  the technology is not being applied as it was originally conceived, which  threatens the traditional maize varieties and, as its promoters affirm, leads to  'the death of the technology. 'Not all farmers are following the technological instructions, nor did they  receive adequate training or technical assistance.  We have seen some farmers  giving the seeds to others, planting it without any precautions and unaware of  the conditions clearly defined by the National Centre for Biological Security. Q: What are the principal risks of applying transgenic technology under the  conditions existing in Cuba?  A: The fundamental risk in the opinion of the agro-ecological movement,  which is 20 years old in this country, is the expansion of a technology that  threatens biodiversity and reduces the ability of native varieties to adapt, for  example, to climate change, drought or changes in temperature. Maize production in Cuba, as does all agricultural production, faces many  other challenges, and it is a mistake to think that GM crops alone will increase  yields. As for potential harm to human health, it is necessary to conduct tests that  prove this transgenic maize can really be consumed without danger in Cuban  households.  If such tests have been done, then they should be made  available. *This story is part of a series of features on biodiversity by Inter Press Service  (IPS), CGIAR/Biodiversity International, International Federation of  Environmental Journalists (IFEJ), and the United Nations Environment  Program/Convention on Biological Diversity (UNEP/CBD) -- all members of  the Alliance of Communicators for Sustainable Development  (www. complusalliance. org).  