When the 47-member Human Rights Council (HRC) affirmed last week that the  right to water and sanitation was a basic human right, the consensus resolution  was described as a 'historic first' for the U. N. ’s premier human rights body  based in Geneva. 'This landmark decision has the potential to change the lives of billions of  human beings who still lack access to water and sanitation,' claimed Catarina  de Albuquerque, a U. N.  independent expert on human rights obligations. What this means, Albuquerque explained, is that the right to water and  sanitation is equal to all other human rights - and is therefore legally binding  and enforceable in existing human rights treaties. The consensus resolution was a logical follow-up to a key General Assembly  resolution adopted last July which also - for the first time - recognised water  and sanitation as basic human rights. But in reality water and sanitation have remained two of the most neglected  sub-texts of the eight Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) which came  under scrutiny at the MDG summit here last month. At this much-ballyhooed summit, world leaders adopted a plan of action -  officially called the ‘outcome document’ - which recognised the obstacles  thwarting the MDGs and offered pledges and commitments to reach the  defined goals by the targeted date: 2015. The primary goals and sub-goals include a reduction by 50 percent the  proportion of people living in extreme poverty and hunger, the reversal of the  spread of HIV/AIDS, the elimination of gender inequality, and the reduction by  half the proportion of people without access to water and sanitation. Currently, over 800-900 million people have no access to safe drinking water  and over 2. 6 billion people are living without adequate sanitation. While most developing nations have made limited progress in providing clean  water, the targets for sanitation remain virtually unreachable. 'If current trends continue unchanged, the international community will miss  the 2015 sanitation MDG target by almost one billion people,' warns U. N.   Deputy Secretary-General Asha-Rose Migiro. In an interview with IPS, Jon Lane, executive director of the Geneva-based  Water Supply and Sanitation Collaborative Council (WSSCC), said he sees  visible signs of progress since 1. 3 billion people have gained access to  improved sanitation since 1990. Still, he says, 'the pace is too slow to allow the world to meet the MDG target  on sanitation. ''There are many reasons for this slow pace,' Lane said, 'but the main one is  that political leaders in developed and developing countries have not grasped  the fundamental role that good sanitation plays for people’s health, dignity,  economic well-being and local environment. 'Success with sanitation would bring a huge swag of benefits, plus it would  support the achievement of other MDG targets on child and maternal  mortality, education, and poverty reduction, among others, he added. Jamie Bartram, director of the Water Institute at the Gillings School of Global  Public Health at the University of North Carolina, told IPS the MDG targets for  water and sanitation are 'wildly under-ambitious'. The idea that anything less than water and sanitation in every home is a  serious target in today’s world is astonishing and binds millions in poverty, he  pointed out. 'Today’s MDG targets focus on water and sanitation for households.  But these  essential needs are required elsewhere too - in schools, workplaces and  markets for example,' said Bartram. The idea that it is possible to deliver effective health care services without  reliable and safe water and sanitation makes no sense, but yet it is the reality  of many health facilities. 'It is often said that sanitation lags water.  Yet, if we use as simple benchmarks  their availability at home, then we see that water lags sanitation and both are  available for only around half of humankind,' Bartram noted. He also said that water and sanitation offer rare opportunities to make  progress across the MDG agenda, yet have not attracted the attention they  deserve. Asked if the outcome document adopted by the U. N.  summit last week offers  any hope, Lane, of the WSSCC, told IPS the document makes note of sanitation  17 times.  'This is good, and an improvement over the past. ' Remember,  sanitation was not originally an MDG target, he said. However, it remains to be seen whether the outcome document as a whole is  concrete enough to accelerate progress so that the target is reached. What’s missing, Lane pointed out, is a reference to hygiene practices: hand  washing with soap can save one million lives per year - mostly children in  developing countries. Fortunately, there is momentum in the sector and sanitation’s profile is rising,  thanks in part to new initiatives like the Global Sanitation Fund operated by  WSSCC and the new Sanitation and Water for All initiative, a multi-stakeholder  network reaching out directly to finance ministers, among others. Pointing out existing deficiencies, Bartram told IPS there is still far too much  focus on building new systems, sources and supplies, and too little on  keeping them working. 'The allure of opening a new facility far outweighs the prosaic task of keeping  them working, but we see a large proportion of all hand pumps [for example]  out of action at any one time, and investing in sustaining systems offers more  bang for the buck. 'He said maintaining and extending effective water supply is challenged by  other demands for water for agriculture, and by other threats, such as climate  change. 'It is imperative that after 2015, water and sanitation are part of the  international development agenda not as part of environmental protection but  as key motors for health and development in their own right,' said Bartram. The associated targets need to focus on services that contribute to household  health and economy.  'We need to seize the opportunity of early adaptation to  improve performance and not to await the need to respond to widespread  failure,' he said. 'We could prevent around 10 percent of the burden of disease worldwide  simply by managing water sanitation and hygiene to achievable and  recognised good practices. 'Water and sanitation services can be costly and need financing, he noted.  But  the world’s poor often pay more in absolute terms for these basic needs.  Most  expenditure on these needs is not by donors and governments but by ordinary  households. He said solutions that respond to the real needs of households and are  affordable are key components of a sustainable future. 