The first comprehensive look at the expected impacts of  climate change on Canada offers an embarrassing and misleading  'don't worry, be happy' vision, citing more golf days and  better access to northern deposits of oil and gas courtesy of  global warming, critics say. 'The chart needs to be withdrawn,' said climate scientist  Danny Harvey of the University of Toronto.  'It is full of  bad science and utterly downplays the serious impacts of  climate change. 'The chart Harvey referred to is the 'Degrees of Change'  interactive diagram released this week as part of a national  educational initiative called 'Climate Prosperity' by the  prestigious Royal Canadian Geographical Society and the  National Round Table on the Environment and the Economy  (NRTEE). 'How can we (Canada) talk about profiting from climate  change when most of the world will suffer devastating  impacts, in part because of our emissions?' Harvey said.  'It  is disgusting. 'In a release about the Climate Prosperity initiative, David  McLaughlin, NRTEE president and CEO, said, 'Adapt and  prosper will be increasingly central to Canadian  governments, communities, and businesses as these effects  become more and more evident. 'NRTEE officials did not respond to IPS requests for an  interview. Among the serious scientific errors in the 'Degrees of  Change' chart is a statement that the Arctic summer sea ice  will decline by 50 percent around 2070.  This September, the  ice declined nearly 30 percent.   With the rate of decline  about 12 percent per decade and accelerating virtually every  year, sea ice experts estimate there will be 100 percent  loss of summer ice within the next decade or two. 'That 50 percent by 2070 is completely wrong.  I don't know  where they are getting that figure from,' said Andrew  Weaver, a leading climatologist at Canada's University of  British Columbia. Informed by IPS that Weaver's 2007 work with the  Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) is cited as  the source, Weaver responded: 'I was lead author of the sea  ice section.  We never said anything like that in our  report. 'Weaver said summer sea ice wasn't expected to survive the  end of century even using the now outdated data that greatly  underestimated the rate of sea ice loss. 'We are still looking at a seasonally ice-free Arctic in 20  to 30 years,' said Mark Serreze, director of the U. S.   National Snow and Ice Data Center, in a release Oct.  4 about  the end of the summer ice melt. The Degrees of Change chart, which is prominently featured  in the current issue of Canadian Geographic magazine, was  compiled by NRTEE staff, none of whom is a climate expert.  A  background document obtained by IPS cites a number of  Canadian climate experts as having vetted the data and  conclusions.  Nearly all of these experts are government  scientists and they are not permitted to talk to the media  directly. A blanket 'gag order' imposed by the Stephen Harper  government in 2005 has become ever more restrictive.  Now  cabinet ministers must give their approval before a  scientist can comment on anything, including their own  research published in a public journal. 'It's terrible, unbelievable really, that this government  silences its scientists,' said John Stone of Ottawa's  Carleton University and a prominent member of the IPCC.   Stone is also listed as a final reviewer of the chart. 'I was surprised they'd spent one and a half years working  on it.  It was a complete mess,' said Stone, who was asked to  help out a few months ago.  Stone says he did not see the  final version before its launch Oct.  5. 'They were selective and made very conservative choices.  It  is difficult to get a sense of the real impacts on Canada  from the chart,' he acknowledged. However, Stone defended the NRTEE effort.  'I give kudos to  them for trying to get a national debate about climate  change started in Canada,' he said. The debate may have already begun. 'This project has the fingerprints of the fossil fuel  industry all over it,' said Harvey. In fact, the report and chart was sponsored by Suncor  Energy, Canada's largest oil company, a major operator in  extracting oil from Alberta's tar sands and that markets  gasoline as Petro-Canada.  Suncor has been fined several  times for pollution violations at its tar sands operations,  even under Canada's oil-friendly governments. One of the impacts downplayed in the chart is the impact on  marine life from increasing ocean acidification from  emissions of fossil fuels, Harvey noted.  'They say 'marine  life will be affected'.  The scientific literature is clear  that we will see complete collapse of marine ecosystems. 'The chart also says some polar bear populations are at risk  of extinction if the global temperature rises four degrees C  by the end of the century.  Harvey says several studies this  year estimate 15 to 30 percent of all species on the planet  are at risk of extinction at two degrees C.  At current rates  of carbon emissions, the planet will be two degrees warmer  by 2050 at the latest, he said. 'The whole thing paints an utterly misleading picture,'  Harvey stressed. John Bennett of the Sierra Club of Canada says the NRTEE,  which is made up mainly of corporate CEOs and former  politicians, are the advisors to the Canadian government on  environmental issues.  They seemed to be primarily looking  for the upside to climate change for Canada.  'They say crops will grow better with more warming but  ignore the impacts of drought and extreme weather,' Bennett  told IPS. Andrew Weaver can't understand how the NRTEE and Royal  Geographic Society can promote a chart that indicates  temperatures could rise more than five degrees C globally  and utterly fail to mention the global calamity that would  result from such a huge increase in temperature. 'It's unbelievable.  Four or five degrees C of warming is a  showstopper. . . it's utter disaster.  There would be major  international strife, mass extinctions of species, collapse  of ecosystems,' he said. However, NRTEE's strongest declaration about their  educational effort is that climate change is real.  'Climate  change is not just a theory.  It’s taking place now,' said  NRTEE Chair Robert Page in a release. The first international conference on climate change was  sponsored by and held in Canada 22 years ago in 1988.  Canada  signed the 1997 Kyoto accord to cut emissions of climate  warming gases.  In 2005, the Harper government said it would  not make those cuts. Canada's emissions are amongst the highest in the world,  having risen more than 30 percent since 1990.  At the  Copenhagen climate conference, Canada was called a  'deadbeat' and 'dinosaur' for its refusal to act on climate  change. 'We need to get way beyond that 'it's happening',' said  Weaver. 