'There's no way we can stay.  It smells like cholera,' says pensioner Imre Fabian  as he shovels the red toxic mud from his kitchen floor.  The flood of toxic waste  that hit people in Devecser is there to stay, and locals are beginning to accept  that their life as they knew it is over. Devecser and Kolontár lie 160 km west of the capital Budapest.  They were  severely damaged after the reservoir of an aluminum factory in nearby Ajka  broke, releasing up to a million cubic metres of a red sludge containing highly  corrosive, toxic and slightly radioactive substances into one of the richest and  most densely populated parts of Hungary. Environment State Secretary Zoltán Illes has called it 'the worst chemical  catastrophe in the history of Hungary,' while Greenpeace spokesman Herwitt  Schuster ranked it among the three worst incidents in Europe in the last 20 to  30 years.  Authorities have started a criminal inquiry. Five people have died and 120 are wounded, mostly from chemical burns.   More than 500 are displaced.  Three are still missing, and search teams are  going through the mud.  The search has led to several more cases of chemical  burns as many fell into the slippery substance or were sprinkled by it.  A  journalist from the Hungarian state news agency MTI is among the injured. Fabian was lucky enough to have left his house five minutes before it was hit  by the flood, leaving for the more elevated neighbourhood Devecser, a town  of 5,000.  His next door neighbour wasn't as lucky, an old woman who had her  feet on the sludge for too long, leaving yellow spots on her skin and an ankle  burnt to the flesh.  More deaths are feared as the effects of toxins may not be immediately visible  or felt. 'Had this happened not at one in the afternoon but two hours later when  everyone comes back from work, we'd be talking about hundreds dead,'  Fabian told IPS.  The mud did kill all his crops, and forms a 10 cm layer on his  garden, as he shows by sinking a stick to the floor. What is now 10 cm high reached two metres at some spots, ruthlessly  bringing down walls, bending fences, turning cars upside down, and dragging  people, animals and bicycles downstream.  Both Devecser and Kolontár look as if a gigantic brush had painted a straight  line on the houses and trees with a rusty red, adding to the locals' feeling of  bewilderment and helplessness against forces greater than them. 'I didn't know what the hell this was, it came as a huge wave, I wasn't even  given a chance to escape,' Ágnes Gombási, who had to be rescued from her  house with half her body immersed in the mud told IPS.  'It felt like being  covered in hot ash.  Even after they took me out, my clothes were burning me.   Now all I have is what I am wearing. 'Three kilometers separate Devecser from smaller Kolontár, formerly home to  800 people.  On the right side of the road hills and trees are green and fertile;  on the left there's a landscape of rusty fields with scattered toys, clothing and  furniture. Some 40 square kilometres of land have been affected, damaging agriculture  and clean water for the next two or three decades, experts say.  The toxic  chemicals show no sign of abating their deadly march, and in nearby Marcal  River all life is extinct. The Danube has also been affected, although the alkali sludge is already so  diluted that there is no risk of biological or environmental damage for  Hungary and its neighbours, authorities claim. It is this catastrophe that turned Kolontár into a centre of global attention.   The media circus follows the efforts of soldiers, firemen and rescue teams,  while locals prepare goulash in a gigantic pot for the tired and hungry  workers.  But this is just the last breath of a village that has been sentenced to  death. 'I had never seen such monstrosity, no image on TV caught what I saw,' one  of the first firemen to arrive to the scene told IPS.  'People had all gathered  around the church on the hill, they could just look at how their houses where  being taken by the mud.  That is, if they had managed to get out. 'Cleaning teams are hurrying to put the mud back in the reservoir, as the  unexpectedly good weather over the last days isn't making their job any  easier.  If the mud dries it will become a toxic and elusive dust, which may  force authorities to evacuate larger areas. While authorities seem in control of the situation in Kolontár, in Devecser  locals feel not much help has come their way.  In front of the improvised  rescue centre people are asking disoriented local authorities for food  coupons, clothes and containers to take away the heaps of furniture and  damaged goods that accumulate in front of their houses. Most of the victims say they don't plan to return.  Yet many shops are starting  to reopen, and cleaning ladies diligently sweep the floors.  It is in this  atmosphere that the people of Devecser wonder whether to stay or start a  new life elsewhere.  It may not be up to them.  