Iceland's economy has been rocky since the bank collapse in October 2008, but  one field has been expanding -- geothermal energy. Faced with a dearth of projects, Icelandic engineering companies have  increasingly been looking overseas for work.  They are being supported by the  government and even by the President directly, to win projects for tapping  geothermal energy abroad. Katrin Juliusdottir, minister for industry, hosted Indian energy minister Dr.   Farooq Abdullah in September to step up cooperation between the two  countries in geothermal energy. At the World Economic Forum in Tianjin, President Olafur Ragnar Grimsson  discussed geothermal energy projects with Chinese Prime Minister Wen  Jiabao, and signed an agreement on digging for geothermal energy in Inner  Mongolia.  The new energy will be used for district heating, greenhouse  cultivation and electricity.  Icelandic firm Enex has been working in Shaanxi in China and will also work  on the Mongolian project. Iceland is looking further.  'In East Africa utilisation of the geothermal  potential could free the people of several nations from the bondage of energy  poverty,' foreign minister Ossur Skarphedinsson told the UN General  Assembly late September.  State-owned Iceland GeoSurvey (ISOR) is one of the more experienced  companies.  Set up in 1945 as part of the National Energy Authority, it has  worked on geothermal projects in more than 40 countries. 'In Kenya, Uganda and Djibouti, ISOR has carried out geothermal exploration  and related activities, while it has also carried out well testing in Germany,  numerical modelling in China and capacity building within the governmental  sector in Nicaragua,' says ISOR spokesperson Brynja Jonsdottir.  'ISOR is also responsible for much of the teaching and training carried out at  the Geothermal Training Programme of the United Nations University (UNU- GTP), and launched several training courses this year in Indonesia and Kenya  (1-11 weeks) in cooperation within UNU-GTP. 'Together with the Icelandic engineering company Verkis, ISOR has set up the  company GeoThermHydro based in Chile.  'GeoThermHydro offers services  encompassing the major portion of the work comprising the development of  geothermal and hydropower plants,' managing director Carlos Jorquera tells  IPS.  'This entails drilling consultation, field management, steam gathering  systems, dams, power transmission facilities, consultation on and  management of power station construction. ' Last May, Reykjavik Energy and Mitsubishi Heavy Industries signed an  agreement to cooperate on geothermal ventures overseas.  Reykjavik Energy  will lead the venture but Iceland GeoSurvey and three engineering companies  -- Mannvit, EFLA and Verkis -- are also involved, along with a drilling  company and two architect studios. 'But it is still in the beginning stages,' says Kristjan B.  Olafsson from  Reykjavik Energy Invest (REI), the international arm of Reykjavik Energy. 'REI has been working mainly in Djibouti in the Assal Rift Valley.  The pre- feasibility study for a geothermal plant has been completed, and four  boreholes have been dug, 2. 5 km deep.  This is thought to be sufficient steam,  energy and pressure for the project.  But negotiations are still ongoing about  the next stage. ''Mannvit is principally working in Hungary, where we are working with the  Hungarian firm Pannergy and have 14-15 projects on the go, although we  also have offices in Germany and the UK and one project still going in  Slovakia.  Our newest project is in Santiago,' says Runolfur Maack, director of  overseas operations with the company. EFLA signed an agreement in June with Croatian energy firm Energy Institut  Hrovje Pozar with the aim of strengthening the development of geothermal  utilisation and other forms of energy production in Croatia and some of the  Balkan countries.  EFLA has also set up a company called Turkison in Turkey  undertaking geothermal exploration with a view to designing geothermal  power plants for district heating. One company involved in the overseas market is Reykjavik Geothermal,  founded in 2008 purely for geothermal projects abroad.  'We are working in  Abu Dhabi, Kenya, Papua New Guinea and India,' says Gudmundur  Thoroddsson, managing director of the company. Another company, Envent, was set up by REI and Geysir Green Energy to work  on geothermal projects in the Philippines and Indonesia.  Its biggest current  project is on Biliran, an island in the Eastern Visayas region of the Philippines,  where a 50MW geothermal power plant is due to come on line in 2012. The bank Islandsbanki (formerly known as Glitnir) has now a special  geothermal energy team.  The division was set up in 2006 and includes  financial advisors 'who are specialised in giving advice about geothermal  projects,' says the team's executive director, Arni Magnusson.   