With new figures showing a record amount of World Bank funding  for projects relying on coal power and other fossil fuels, the  issue of reforming the institution's energy lending was once  again a hot topic at the World Bank and IMF annual meetings,  which concluded over the weekend. The figures, released by the Bank in mid-September, show it  lent 3. 4 billion dollars to coal projects, or one quarter of  all its energy lending.  If a transmission project meant to  connect coal-powered stations to the grid in India is  included, that number rises to about 4. 4 billion dollars,  according to an analysis by the NGO Bank Information Center  (BIC). This higher total also means that lending for coal-based  power rose 356 percent from the fiscal year 2009, largely  due to a June loan for a 4800-megawatt plant to be built in  South Africa.  That one loan, to utility giant Eskom,  amounted to over three billion dollars. But the Bank energy lending picture is more complicated than  that.  BIC also notes that the Bank numbers show that new  renewable energy and energy efficiency lending combined for  a record 3. 4 billion dollars, though that figure is still  short of the funding for coal projects alone.  And they point  out that fossil fuel lending is about equal to donor country  commitments to the Climate Investment Funds created at the  Bank in 2008. Pointing to the key role they feel the Bank could play in  promoting clean, low-emission energy, then, many NGOs and  activists — and some governments — remain unhappy with the  mixed and often contradictory record they see indicated by  these numbers. In light of these criticisms, the Bank has been conducting a  review of its energy lending strategies, according to which  it makes decisions on loans to energy-related projects, a  draft of which is set to be completed in early 2011 before  being finalised in the middle of the year. The new strategy will try to bridge the gap between  increasing energy access in poor countries while mitigating  the impact of Bank-funded projects on communities, the  environment and the climate. A much-anticipated report assessing these impacts was  released just last month.  The study, by the Independent  Evaluation Group (IEG), found the safeguards and  sustainability policies meant to help Bank lending avoid  these impacts have largely been effective, but that  increased attention needs to be paid to environmental and  social risks. Between fiscal years 1999 and 2008, the proportion of Bank  lending in the 'very high impact' category shifted from five  to 11 percent and that in the 'substantial impact' category  increased from 37 to 51 percent, while lending deemed to  have a 'low impact' dropped from 40 to 18 percent, the Sep.   23 report said. The Eskom loan awarded earlier this year is seen by many  groups as belonging in that high or very high impact  category.  The U. S.  and several other countries abstained  from voting on the loan after concerns were raised about its  potential negative impacts, including the emissions from  burning coal, a purported lack of impact on increasing  energy access in southern Africa, the air and water  pollution to be caused in the local area, and fears the loan  repayment would weaken the South African rand. In August the U. S.  once again expressed its reservations  over the Bank's continued funding of fossil fuel-powered  projects. In approving additional funding for some Bank's  International Development Association as part of a broader  foreign operations bill, the U. S.  Senate included language  warning that the Bank should develop a strategy that both  increases its support for clean energy and phases out its  support for fossil fuel projects, with the exception of  those projects specifically aimed at providing energy access  for the poor. Whether a project meets this increased energy access  criterion, though, is not always clear, as illustrated by  the Eskom case. A report released by the advocacy group Oil Change  International ahead of last week's meetings argues that none  of the Bank's oil- or coal-related lending in the past two  years has prioritised energy access. 'World Bank officials justify massively polluting coal and  oil projects by saying that they increase energy access for  the poor — but that's just not true,' said Oil Change  International's Elizabeth Bast.  'Not only do the poor suffer  the climate impacts of increased fossil fuel emissions and  impacts from local pollution, but they are also not  receiving the energy from the same projects that damage  their livelihoods. 'The Bank will be asking the U. S.  Congress for more money as  part of the general capital increase Bank president Robert  Zoellick announced at the institution's spring meetings in  April, but U. S.  officials have expressed misgivings over the  mixed history of Bank energy projects. On the one hand, the Bank has invested in such projects as  the South African Eskom plant, an oil- and gas-fuelled power  plant in Albania, and, through its International Finance  Corporation, a company developing new offshore oil fields in  Ghana — which is currently facing corruption allegations,  according to the NGO Bretton Woods Project. On the other, the Bank is running programmes to help bring  clean energy technologies to developing countries as well as  several other climate-related funds.  It also appointed a  renewable energy expert, Daniel Kammen, as head of the  institution's efforts to improve renewable energy production  and energy efficiency, a brand new position. This chequered history is becoming more significant as the  Bank and the IMF are poised to be significant sources for  the climate finance money helping poor countries deal with  and mitigate the effects of climate change. At the time of the Eskom vote, the U. S.  expressed the hope  that the loan would be the last of its kind from the Bank.   But, for now, it remains to be seen how the institution will  rewrite energy lending strategy. 