Anxious to prevent the collapse of Jamaica's overexploited  marine fisheries, the Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries is  promoting the consumption of lionfish to control its  burgeoning population.  At risk officials say, are the nation's  marine biodiversity, its food security and economic well- being. 'The situation in Jamaica is urgent,' said Nelsa English,  national coordinator for the Jamaican component of a  Caribbean-wide Invasive Alien Species Project at the  National Environment and Planning Agency (NEPA). 'A lack of sufficient natural predators suggests that it  (lionfish) could be a potentially significant threat to  Jamaica's biodiversity and the ecosystem in general,' she  noted. Jamaica's marine resources are stretched to the breaking  point, its reefs overfished and degraded due to  environmentally unfriendly fishing practises such as the use  of explosives, poisons and fishing nets that are below the  legal mesh size. Scientists agree that many of the reefs have been reduced to  coral communities and no longer function as vital ecosystems  because their biodiversity is so severely degraded.  Some  studies suggest that only two percent of some reefs are live  coral and the structures themselves are reportedly being  eroded faster than they can regenerate.  'Currently our fishing industry survives on the removal of  young adults.  This practice does not allow for enough fish  to mature and reproduce which puts pressure on the fecundity  of the ecosystem,' English told IPS.  According to English, the presence of the lionfish - which  ranges in colours from orange to maroon - in such a depleted  marine environment could wipe out the fishing industry.  The  Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries estimates that there  are more than 30,000 fishers on the island.  The lionfish (Pterois volitans and Pterois miles) was first  seen in Jamaican waters in 2008 but rapidly spread island- wide.  Experts say they can reduce survival rates of small  reef fish by as much as 80 percent; growing to an average of  15 inches and spawning up to 30,000 eggs at least twice a  year.  There are few predators of this Pacific native in the  region besides groupers — and there are not many in these  overfished waters. The Montego Bay Marine Park, a marine reserve and fish  sanctuary on the island's north coast, is culling the  lionfish to reduce their numbers.  'During underwater surveys, it would be normal to encounter  at least three lionfish during a daytime dive.  During  dusk/dawn hours, these numbers could be easily reach three  or four times that number,' said Brian Zane, the park's  executive director.  Cullings are carried out in association with the Fisheries  Division of the Ministry of Agriculture and NEPA, the agency  responsible for managing Jamaica's natural resources.   Officials are examining the feasibility of installing a  branching reef structure - said to be inhospitable to  lionfish - in what is also a national park.  NEPA and its  partners have drafted a National Strategy and Action Plan  for invasive alien species (IAS). Agriculture and Fisheries minister Christopher Tufton is  already leading an aggressive public education campaign to  get Jamaicans eating lionfish.  Television programmes, videos  of high-profile locals like Prime Minister Bruce Golding  enjoying meals of lionfish, and some of the hotel industry's  most decorated chefs preparing what Tufton describes as  'good food' are broadcast regularly.  Tufton believes that  Jamaicans can eat their way out of the lionfish problem.  'I believe the way to control the lionfish is to promote its  consumption.  We are going to bring in chefs who know how to  prepare them and we are going to eat them,' Tufton said at  the start of the campaign. Jamaica has one of the highest rates of endemism - unique  local species - in the Caribbean and also has one of the  largest numbers of invasive alien species - a total of 102.   This puts it third behind Puerto Rico and the Dominican  Republic, islands that are also fighting the lionfish  invasion.  Like Jamaica, regional governments are pitting the human  predator against the lionfish in a race to keep its  population in check. In May, hoteliers in Negril, Jamaica sponsored a three-day  competition in which teams of fishermen caught a total of  1,446 lionfish. Last year in Puerto Rico, the U. S.  National Oceanic and  Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) sponsored a five-city tour  of the island complete with celebrity chefs as part of its  efforts to commercialise the lionfish. Elsewhere, fishermen who are willing to work hard and risk a  painful sting will be rewarded.  In the Bahamas, lionfish  reportedly sells for about $12 per pound - up to three times  other varieties.  In the Turks and Caicos Islands, government  has a $3,000 prize for the first fisherman who catches 3,000  of the candy-striped predator.  The lionfish's adaptability to the mangrove and seagrass  beds that provide sanctuary to juvenile reef fish will,  scientists say, make it difficult to eradicate.  Already  there have been sightings at the Bogue Lagoon, the primary  mangrove area within the Montego Bay National Park. 'Sightings have been reported along the residential  periphery of the Bogue Lagoon Fish Sanctuary.  It would stand  to reason that they may be distributed throughout the deeper  reaches of the lagoon, however, reports are limited and  proper underwater surveys are inhibited by poor visibility,'  Zane said. With several countries affected, governments are working  together to find a common solution to the problem. The United Nations Environment Programme's Global  Environment Facility (UNEP-GEF) is funding the Mitigating  the Threat of Invasive Alien Species in the Insular  Caribbean Project, which aims to assist regional scientists  from Trinidad and Tobago to Bahamas, to come up strategies  to manage the threat of Invasive Alien Species (IAS)  including the lionfish. The programme aims to develop a system for early detection,  response and control of invasive alien species as well as  systems to prevent their introduction. The four-year project will tackle IAS in five countries  including Trinidad and Tobago and St.  Lucia, as well as the  lionfish infestation in Jamaica, Dominican Republic and the  Bahamas.  The University of the West Indies Discovery Bay  Marine Lab is working with the Montego Bay Marine Park, NEPA  and other stakeholders to develop a management strategy,  record data on the lionfish and develop passive capture  mechanisms. In the short term, Zane proposed culling as the most viable  response.  He is also calling for an immediate ban on the  capture of predator populations including the Goliath and  Nassau Grouper and protection for branching corals. Worldwide, the impact, prevention and control of invasive  species are estimated to cost $100 billion and the damage  they cause at $1. 4 trillion, or about five percent of global  GDP. *This story is part of a series of features on biodiversity  by IPS, CGIAR/Biodiversity International, IFEJ and UNEP/CBD,  members of Communicators for Sustainable Development  (http://www. complusalliance. org). 