A hydropower dam project in Laos that could permanently scar  South-east Asia’s largest river, the Mekong, faces a strong  wall of opposition from local and regional green groups  determined to protect its pristine environment.    This defiance comes in the wake of the Lao government’s  submission in late September of plans for the 1,260-megawatt  Sayaboury dam project, confirming its intention to proceed  with it and win approval for the first megadam on the  mainstream of the lower Mekong, which is also shared by  Thailand, Cambodia and Vietnam.    'It is very dangerous and damaging to the environment and  the people to have dams on the Mekong,' Premrudee Daoroung  of Towards Ecological Recovery and Regional Alliance  (TERRA), a Bangkok-based green lobby, said in an interview.   'We are suspicious that this is an effort to move this  problematic dam-building process forward. '   Environmentalists’ opposition to the dam, which is to be  built in the north-west Lao province of Sayaboury, sets the  stage for a three-cornered battle that will test the limits  of environmental diplomacy in this region.  Drawn into this  tussle, besides the green groups and the governments, is the  Mekong River Commission (MRC), an inter-governmental  organisation based in the Lao capital, Vientiane.    The Lao government’s submission triggers the MRC’s  mechanism for assessing dam proposals like the Sayaboury one  and its cross-border impacts.  But while officials say this  allows discussion of dam projects that have caused tensions  in the past, Save the Mekong, a coalition of local and  regional green groups, finds it deeply flawed.    This mechanism, which has existed for the past 15 years,  is now being dusted off and tested for the first time: the  prior consultation process for dam building, formally known  as the Procedure for Notification Prior Consultation and  Agreement (PNPCA).    'The Sayaboury dam’s project documents, submitted to the  MRC Secretariat by the Lao government thus initiating the  PNPCA, have not been released to the public and represent a  complete failure of transparency; this despite the fact that  a stated principle of the PNPCA is transparency,' Save the  Mekong said in an Oct.  13 letter to MRC Chief Executive  Officer Jeremy Bird.    'Official documents on the MRC’s website about the PNPCA  process lack a clear explanation of the actual procedure to  be followed, contain wording that is deliberately ambiguous,  and have no commitment to consultation with the public,' it  added.    But Bird sees the PNPCA, which was written into the  agreement that helped create the MRC in 1995, in a different  light.  'The process will be a test for (MRC) member  countries’ commitment to sustainable development of water  and related resources of the Mekong,' he explained in an e- mail interview.    'The fact that a forum exists among the four Mekong  countries to discuss the transboundary impacts of mainstream  development demonstrates the willingness to engage in  environmental diplomacy,' he added.  'It can be viewed as an  opportunity for member countries, for the first time, to  come to a consensus on how to proceed with development that  could impact on the region. '   It is uncertain if this process will be confined to  official discussions, shutting out NGOs that say they speak  on behalf of the riverbank communities expected to bear the  brunt of the Sayaboury dam project.     'Although the prior consultation on specific projects  does not formally require additional public participation,  it does not exclude it either,' Bird revealed.  'In the near  future, Lower Mekong Basin countries will discuss how to  involve relevant stakeholders through public participation  and consultation relating to the prior consultation  process. '   Under the PNPCA, consultations among the four countries  on a dam project on the Mekong’s mainstream should be  completed within six months.  They need to reach a consensus  before a hydropower project can get underway.    Activists add that the democracy deficit in the region  cannot be sidestepped in discussions about dam projects.   Laos and Vietnam are ruled by communist parties that brook  no criticism and provide little space for independent NGOs.   Cambodia, although more open to opposition and civil  society’s voices, has a mixed record.    This is why Thailand, which has the most democratic space  of all four, is a key battleground in public debates about  dams on the Mekong mainstream.  In early September, Thai  villagers living along the Mekong wrote to the government of  Prime Minister Abhisit Vejjajiva to withdraw support for the  Sayaboury dam.    Although it is not the first of dams on the Mekong, the  Sayaboury project is significant because it will be the  first of 11 planned dams on the river’s mainstream, nine of  which will be in Laos.  Vientiane’s march to become the  battery of the region is being driven by what its officials  expect will be a foreign exchange windfall from exporting  the electricity generated by its hydropower potential.    The Sayaboury dam, to be built by a Thai company close to  the Thai-Laos border, will submerge 2,130 homes and some  200,000 residents will 'suffer impacts to their livelihoods,  income and food security,' states Save the Mekong.  'Up to 41  fish species would be at risk of extinction, including the  critically endangered and iconic Mekong Giant Catfish. '   The 4,880-km Mekong River flows from Tibetan plateau,  through southern China, winds its way by Burma and through  the Mekong basin, before finally emptying out in the South  China Sea in southern Vietnam.    China has built four of a cascade of eight dams in the  upper stretches of the Mekong, all of which activists have  criticised for damaging a rich ecosystem that 60 million  people living in the Mekong Basin depend on.  Annual income  from fisheries there is estimated at two to three billion  U. S.  dollars.  