Surprising how dark it is here, even on a clear summer day.  Centuries-old trees,  some as high as a 15-floor house, allow only a little light to sift down to earth.   Fallen trunks bar the muddy paths, and no less than 28 species of mosquitoes  can't wait to suck your blood. But for pristine nature lovers there is no place like this.  The last primeval  forest in the European lowlands that covers parts of both Poland and Belarus  is home to wolves, lynx, red deers, wild boars, elks, birds and, not least, the  European bison.  Today 450 of these massive creatures, reintroduced after  World War I, freely roam the area. Last month one of the bisons was illegally shot dead by a hunter, who said he  mistook the beast for a wild boar.  For those long engaged in a fight to save the forest, this was a telling incident  and one more impulse to act.  Thirty volunteers from Pracownia na Rzecz  Wszystkich Istot (Workshop for All Beings) broke up deer hunting, and  demanded the local administration make an environmental assessment of  hunting.  They asked the central government to decree a hunt-free zone along  National Park borders. 'There is one simple way to avoid such incidents: enlarge the National Park to  cover the entire complex of Bialowieza Forest,' Robert Cyglicki, head of  Greenpeace Poland told IPS.  The problem is not just hunting.  According to environmental NGOs and  scientists, the forest is on the verge of ultimate devastation at the hands of  the state foresters and the timber industry. State protection is patchy.  Bialowieza National Park was established in 1921,  and since 1992 has been on the World Heritage List.  But today the park  protects only 103 of 600 sq km of the local forest.  Most is still logged.  Inside  the reserves, where tourists are not allowed, lumbermen cut trees under the  pretext of fighting bark beetles. Exploitative timber extraction has had a dramatic effect, and the share of old  growth has dropped to less than 20 percent. 'Claims that logging has anything to do with protection is a lie,' says Adam  Wajrak, journalist, who 14 years ago abandoned capital Warsaw to live a  simple life in a small village inside the Bialowieza Forest. 'Even the 'sanitary' cut, good for commercial wood, in a unique place like this  means extermination of rare animals, mushrooms and lichens bounded with  dead trees,' says Wajrak. The Polish government has resisted calls for the cut to be reduced from  100,000 to 30,000 sq metres per year, and to enlarge Bialowieza National  Park to cover the entire area of the forest. The main opposition comes from local councils, where foresters, hunters and  timber industry representatives have influence.  The local councils can veto any  project aimed at making or enlarging national parks -- even when on solely  state-owned grounds.  Since the councils got this privilege ten years ago, the  area covered by national parks in Poland has not expanded by a single  hectare. There is more than one solution, experts say.  The Ministry of Environment has  proposed a new Bialowieza Development Programme that provides for the  National Park to double its current size at the first stage to 35 percent of all  forest.  The government is prepared to pay 18 million euros to gain local  communities' consent.  That is much more than the annual budget of all these  poor villages.  The money would go for green investments like solar panels or  sewage purification plants, and for tourism development. Critics say the plan is simply bribery.  'This is very bad precedence,' says  Cyglicki of Greenpeace.  'The investments are needed, but communities of  Bialowieza Forest should compete for available funds on equal basis with all  others.  They were once given 7. 5 million euro, but later they withdrew their  consent to enlarge the park.  We don't want to play that again. 'The ministry's project looks good on paper, but in fact means nothing more  than joining the existing reserves with the existing park.  The enlarged park  would consist of three separate parts, a solution hard to accept from the  environmental point of view. The Ministry of Environment did not respond to an IPS request for comment. Greenpeace wants the Bialowieza Development Programme to be scrapped.   The group hung a banner declaring 'I Love the Forest' on the front of the  Ministry of Environment in Warsaw, and set off a campaign to gather 100,000  signatures needed to file a draft bill in parliament.  The bill stipulates that  local councils give up their veto power for non-binding consultations. 'The response is huge, we believe we can gather all the signatures by the end  of October,' said Cyglicki. 'I live in the forest, so I can tell you that only a small, influential group wants  the forest to be logged,' says journalist Wajrak.  'Most people see that  protection of their environment does not collide with their interests.  The  career of a lumberjack is no longer the peak of their aspirations. 'All other temperate forests in Europe and America have already been cut and  replaced by artificial tree plantations,' says Wajrak.  'Bialowieza Forest is like  the last coral reef -- we need to protect it, not log it like barbarians. '(*This story is part of a series of features on sustainable development by IPS - - Inter Press Service, and IFEJ -- the International Federation of Environmental  Journalists. ) 