The red sludge spill at the Ajka alumina plant in Hungary has been called one of  the three worst environmental disasters in Europe in the last 20-30 years.  But  environmentalists warn other waste depositing sites in Central and Eastern  Europe are prone to similar accidents. About 700,000 cubic metres of red sludge, a byproduct in alumina  production containing heavy metals and chemicals, spilled out of a depositing  tank at the Ajka (western Hungary) plant of company MAL on Oct.  4, covering  fields and nearby villages.  Eight people have died because of the flood, and  150 are wounded.  Long-term damage to land and waters may mean that life  in the region will never resume as before.  Hungarian authorities are investigating the causes of the accident and  working on limiting damage from an expected second spill of comparable  dimensions.  A breach going unnoticed in one of the depositing tanks led to  the first spill.  According to MAL CEO Zoltan Bakonyi -- detained by the police for  questioning -- the reservoirs had been inspected daily with no signs of  deterioration apparent.  However, environmental group WWF published  photographs of MAL's reservoirs taken by Hungarian company Interspect  showing damage to the walls three months before the accident.  'This accident raised the question whether monitoring (of waste sites) by  member states is enough,' says WWF European Policy Officer Sergey Moroz.   'The regulatory base can definitely be strengthened. ' Moroz was involved in the process of devising an EU Mining Waste Directive  (adopted in 2006, to be implemented in 2012) and thinks that earlier  implementation of the directive could have helped to prevent the Ajka  accident. The directive addresses management of mining waste generated during  extraction and processing of ores.  The text contains provisions regarding the  planning and construction of waste facilities, protecting the environment  during operation of waste sites, aftercare and rehabilitation of sites upon  closure, regular inspections by authorities, and regular reviews of functioning  permits.  Moroz told IPS that industry lobby led the European Council (heads of  executives of member states) to push for delay in the implementation date of  the directive and to weaken its provisions.  Terhi Lehtonen, advisor to the Green Party in the European Parliament, also  involved in the adoption of the directive, agrees.  'The industry lobbied aggressively against provisions for mandatory financial  guarantees (funds for rehabilitation of waste sites to be deposited by  companies as a condition for receiving functioning permits) -- and the final  result did not include financial guarantees -- and for permit defence,  meaning that if companies act in accordance with permit conditions, they  have limited, if any, liability for damage caused,' Lehtonen told IPS.  In Hungary, MAL has so far offered to pay 360 euros for each family affected  by the spill.  The government estimates damages to be paid by the company  at over 70 million euros.  In accordance with current EU legislation and even with the requirements of  the Mining Directive, there is considerable leverage room for companies to  negotiate with national authorities over what constitutes hazardous waste  falling under the strictest safety standards. Under categorizations in force, the Ajka red sludge is not considered  hazardous waste, as cyanide, for instance.  Yet under the Mining Directive,  such red sludge can face the toughest controls if deposited in conditions that  pose risks of major accidents.  Following the Ajka accident, WWF has drawn up a list of over ten waste  depositing sites in the Danube region where serious accidents could happen,  including two alumina plants.   In Romania, alumina producer Alum Tulcea has for years deposited red sludge  (at a rate of 1,000 tonnes daily) containing heavy metals in a landfill,  polluting nearby lands and even the Danube Delta.  In 2009, the company launched a plan to close the deposit and rehabilitate  the land.  Alum Tulcea did not respond to IPS requests to clarify progress on  these works. Simona Constantinescu from the Tulcea environmental protection authority  told IPS that so far work has been carried out to separate the old deposit from  what will be a new ecological deposit site, the latter being also under  construction.  Measures to secure the open red sludge deposit have not been  implemented so far.   Meanwhile, several local newspapers have reported this month that villagers  in the area neighbouring the plant are complaining of 'red dust' affecting  their health and crops. Alum plans to continue operations, hence the company has an interest in  investing in better waste management.  More problematic is the case of numerous closed plants in Central and  Eastern Europe which have left behind waste deposits without rehabilitating  them.  The situation of closed waste sites is not addressed even by the Mining  Directive, bar the requirement that member states submit and update lists of  closed sites.  At Almasfuzito in northwestern Hungary, alumina production stopped in  1995, but eight million tonnes of red sludge containing iron and lead  continue to be stored in pools covering 174 hectares.  The biggest of the  reservoirs remains open.  Management of the reservoirs was taken up in 1997 by Tata Environmental  Protection Ltd.  The company is supposed to dispose of and recover the waste  and its strategy includes monitoring groundwater pollution and re-cultivation.   Here too, progress is difficult to check as public contact details for the  company are not functional.   Shuzi Attila from local NGO Environmental Culture Association of Esztergom  told IPS the reservoirs at Almasfuzito are still dangerous because they are not  isolated, hence groundwater can reach them and carry the red sludge into the  Danube.  Furthermore, Shuzi says, there are signs of deterioration of the  reservoir dams, which are also situated in a tectonically active area.  'The reservoirs are located close to the Danube, and when the river floods  they look like islands encircled by the Danube water,' said Shuzi, emphasizing  the risk of red sludge ending up in the Danube.  WWF Bulgaria reports over 20 tailing dams in the country, some  decommissioned, where heavy metals buried in the ground could infiltrate  nearby water sources.  Authorities here are still to classify dangerous waste  disposal sites.  