With a record number of people undernourished last year — and  that number only down about 10 percent this year — this year's  World Food Day, to take place Saturday, carries with it a new  sense of urgency.  But in the conferences and events being held  to commemorate the day, there will also likely be a sense of  hope and opportunity. That hope is coming from the discovery of both new ways to  feed a crowded, hungry planet and new efforts to spread and  implement those practices. Danielle Nierenberg has spent the past year travelling the  globe as co-director of the Worldwatch Institute's  Nourishing the Planet project, whose mission has been to  assess and raise awareness of the state of agricultural  innovations — everything from cropping methods to irrigation  technology to agricultural policy — with a dual emphasis on  sustainability and productivity. This week she is in the heart of U. S.  farm country at the  World Food Prize's conference in Iowa, where she and  representatives of other organisations from around the world  are discussing the solutions that might make feeding seven  billion people a bit easier. 'What we really wanted to do was offer really concrete  examples of what is going on on the ground, and be a partial  roadmap for the funding and donor communities by pointing  them to projects that are really working,' she said in a  phone interview. 'For the first time in a long time, funders and donors are  really interested in Africa again after years of neglecting  agriculture there.  I think there is a huge opportunity to  point them to projects that are not based on silver-bullet  technology but instead on low-cost but high-payoff ways of  helping feed people and improving their income while also  protecting the environment,' Nierenberg said. In Iowa, she, co-director Brian Halweil and others from her  programme are previewing some of their research, which will  be published in full in January as the next installment of  Worldwatch's annual State of the World report. Nourishing the Planet was inspired in large part by the  momentum gathering behind efforts to take on global hunger  through sustainable approaches to agriculture.  Nierenberg  points particularly to the 2008 report by the International  Assessment of Agricultural Knowledge, Science and Technology  for Development (IAASTD), a three-year project by hundreds  of scientists. That report recommended greater reliance on traditional and  agro-ecological approaches to increasing agricultural  production rather than highly technological, industrial  solutions. 'It was sort of the first time it was said out loud like  that,' Nierenberg explained. Nourishing the Planet was then born in spring 2009 after  securing a grant from the Gates Foundation.  Since then,  Nierenberg has been on the road, travelling to more than 25  countries across sub-Saharan Africa looking at  environmentally sustainable ways of alleviating hunger and  poverty. In her travels, some themes emerged.  Innovations in food  storage, for instance, have the potential to make a large  impact.  Forty percent of food is wasted after the harvest,  she says, largely because it rots due to inadequate storage. She points to research on technical ways to keep food from  going bad, such as hermetically sealed bags for storing  cowpeas, or less expensive ways, such as solar dryers used  to preserve fruit. 'In places like Niger, cowpeas are only harvested once a  year and they're a staple, so keeping enough of them free of  mold or away from rats is very important,' Nierenberg said. Urban migration and finding ways to keep youth involved in  agriculture are two other major, and slightly related,  themes. 'Fourteen million Africans move to urban areas every year —  the biggest rural to urban migration in history — and  finding ways for those folks to feed themselves is becoming  more important than ever before,' she said. Moreover, 'so many youth migrate to cities because they  think there are no opportunities in their villages.  Making  sure they have jobs that not only help feed their  communities but are attractive to them is becoming more  important than ever before. 'Making those jobs more attractive might involve adding value  to the crops grown, she said, through juicing, drying or  even growing higher-value crops they might be able to  export. Assessing ideas and innovations in these and other areas has  meant evaluating the work of a variety of groups. Nierenberg pointed to Nairobi-based Urban Harvest, which  works mainly with slum-dwellers on such goals as helping  them find different ways to keep their foods ripe.  They are  also helping these urban farmers to grow food for seed,  particularly for indigenous vegetables, which they can then  sell to rural farmers who might not have the time to grow  these crops for seed. 'There's sort of been a shift of urban areas helping feed  rural areas,' Nierenberg said.  Elsewhere, groups like Slow Food International — much more  commonly associated with high-end Western consumers — are  helping groups already on the ground in Africa with work  like promoting biodiversity on farms and building school  gardens.  But they are also going beyond the farm to help re- teach how to cook indigenous foods. 'In the U. S.  we often cook things in microwaves that we find  in boxes at grocery stores, and in Africa so many imported  foods have infiltrated the market that people don't even  cook their own rice anymore or they don't remember how to  use the indigenous vegetables that they now call weeds,' she  explained. This work highlighting successful projects has meant  sometimes making sure that people know about organisations  that 'maybe don't have a great website or that aren't really  noticed by the Rockefeller Foundation or the Gates  Foundation — making sure the good work they're doing is not  going unnoticed because it deserves more support. '