As the Hungarian government continues its efforts to limit the consequences of  a tragic toxic leak last week, it has also used the opportunity to attack a  supposed former communist-turned capitalist oligarchy that allegedly runs the  country's economy. Last Monday one of the walls of a reservoir at the MAL aluminum factory in  Ajka cracked, releasing over a million cubic metres of alkaline mud on nearby  Kolontár and Devecser, two small localities located 160km west of Budapest. So far nine people have died as a result of drowning or prolonged exposure to  the toxic substances contained in the mud.  The last victim died Wednesday  this week in a Budapest hospital shortly after his daughter's body was found  in the fields surrounding Kolontár. A task force has just completed the construction of a new barrier that will  stop a second flood in the likely event that a wall in the original reservoir  collapses.  Experts are currently running tests on the new 1,500 metres long  and 30 metres wide structure in a race against time. The first leak released only 20 percent of the mud in the container; the  remaining 80 percent is however less watery and is easier to control.  However,  new risks are posed by the drying mud in the surrounding area, as it has  turned into a toxic dust which could be inhaled by locals.  Authorities have already evacuated all of the 800 inhabitants in Kolontár, but  in nearby Devecser, home to 5000 people, children are beginning to return to  school wearing breathing masks. Hungary's political elite has been visibly involved in the investigation to the  incident, with conservative Prime Minister Viktor Orbán himself announcing  the arrest and interrogation of the factory's chief executive Zoltán Bakonyi. 'Announcing arrests is the task of a spokesman of the police, this is pure  populist politics, but it is coherent with the expectations of voters,' Attila  Gyulai, analyst at the Budapest-based Political Capital think tank told IPS. Gyulai refers to the overwhelming electoral support Orbán's party Fidesz  received since it got elected last April with a two-thirds majority and the  promise to carry out a 'revolution at the ballots. 'The link between the election and the current investigation was admitted by  Orbán himself who, in a recent parliamentary session on the toxic flood,  stressed his government had been elected to bring Hungary into a new era  and that this involved showing that 'we pursue the public's interests and  stand up to these powerful people. ''These people' are 'former communists who attempted to escape from politics  by converting their political capital into economic capital' during the  privatisations of the 1990s, says Gyulai. The Ajka aluminum plant is among the former state assets that were cheaply  privatised back then, and many of the administrators of MAL are said to be  connected to socialist politicians, among them former prime minister Ferenc  Gyurcsány. The aluminum industry was among the most dynamic under the socialist  regime, which made it into one of the most sought after targets of investors  during the privatisation in the 1990s, a process that still causes great  resentment among Hungarians. Yet in spite of right-wing talk of a country dominated by a former communist  economic elite, Hungary is one of the most internationalised economies in  Europe, and domestic capital usually supports whatever political force is in  power. 'While some younger politicians demand that the whole process is revised, it  is much more likely that the government will investigate individual cases,'  Gyulai told IPS. The first and easier target will be the aluminum factory in Ajka, with  increasing indications that the plant is directly responsible for last week's  tragedy.  The Hungarian daily Népszabadság reported that workers at the  factory had warned management of serious damage at the reservoir.  The  workers claim management threatened them with dismissal if the information  leaked to the outside. Even more surprising is the result of an inspection carried out in the factory  days before the disaster, which concluded there were no safety problems.  Off  the record some ask whether this is a case of serious incompetence by  environmental authorities or an indication of widespread business corruption  practices. Another question is whether the incident is a consequence of decadent  socialist industrialisation or the result of post-socialist wild capitalism,  especially since the owners of MAL are among the 30 richest persons in  Hungary. Orbán seems more inclined to blame the privatisation process and, relying on  his constitutional majority, approved a law allowing for nationalisation of the  factory, where production will recommence at the end of this week under a  new management. The new law has been criticised for facilitating the nationalisation of  companies without justification.  Gyurcsány has claimed that Hungary is  sliding into 'Putinism', implying many more companies could fall into state  hands. The former prime minister may have reasons to worry: 'He seems to be the  main target, but any company could come under attack, they just need to  check if they fulfill environmental requirements,' the analyst says.   