Africa is hungry - 240 million people are undernourished.  Now,  for the first-time, small African farmers have been properly  consulted on how to solve the problem of feeding sub-Saharan  Africa.  Their answers appear to directly repudiate a massive  international effort to launch an African Green Revolution  funded in large part by the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation. Instead of new hybrid seeds, chemical fertilisers and  pesticides, family farmers in West Africa said they want to  use local seeds, avoid spending precious cash on chemicals  and most importantly to direct public agricultural research  to meet their needs, according to a multi-media publication  released on World Food Day (Oct.  16). 'There is a clear vision from these small farmers.  They are  rejecting the approach of the Alliance for a Green  Revolution in Africa,' said report co-author Michel Pimbert  of the International Institute for Environment and  Development (IIED), a non-profit research institute based in  London. 'These were true farmer-led assessment where small farmers  and other food producers listened and questioned  agricultural and other experts and then came up with their  own recommendations,' Pimbert told IPS. 'Food and agriculture policy and research tend to ignore the  values, needs, knowledge and concerns of the very people who  provide the food we all eat — and often serve instead  powerful commercial interests such as multinational seed and  food retailing companies,' he said. The United Nations Special Rapporteur on the Right to Food,  Olivier De Schutter, backs the need for a fundamental shift  in food and agricultural research to make it more democratic  and accountable to society. 'I applaud the efforts described here to organise citizen's  juries and farmers' assessments of agricultural research in  West Africa,' writes De Schutter in a forward to the IIED  publication titled 'Democratising Agricultural Research for  Food Sovereignty in West Africa'. The publication includes video clips and audio files that  feature the voices and concerns of food producers from  across the region. About half a billion Africans depend on small-scale farming  of less than two hectares.  Most of the smallholder farmers  are women.  There is serious concern about the direction of  Africa's public agriculture research, which is mainly funded  by donor countries.  Funders exert control over what type of  research they fund and that almost always reflects a  northern science and technology bias favouring new hybrid  seeds that must be purchased every year and chemical  fertilisers, said Pimbert. To find out what smallholder farmers want African public  agricultural research to do for them, independent farmer-led  assessment of the current agricultural research was done in  Mali.  Those findings fed into two citizen/farmer juries  comprised of 40 to 50 ordinary farmers and other food  producers.  Each jury addressed specific issues such as what  kind of agricultural research smallholders want and how food  and agricultural research can be more democratic. The jurors listened to and questioned a wide range of expert  witnesses from Africa and Europe.  They considered the  evidence presented in light of their experiences and agreed  on a series of recommendations for their respective  governments.  Those included direct farmer involvement in  setting the public research agenda and strategic priorities,  research into traditional varieties and ecological farming,  and the idea that such research should be funded by their  own governments not outsiders as is the case presently in  West Africa. It's a fully open and participatory process, said Pimbert,  who has been involved in similar processes in India and  South America.  Jurors are carefully selected to reflect a  broad range of localities, variety of knowledge and gender.   An independent oversight panel with representatives from a  number of countries such as Senegal, Burkina Faso, Niger and  Benin acts like election observers to make sure the entire  process is fair and open. 'This has never happened in West Africa before.  For that  matter, ordinary farmers in Canada or the U. S.  have never  been asked what they want public ag research to do for  them,' he said. Farmers and 'ordinary' citizens directly deciding what kind  of agricultural research they want is vital for achieving   food security, local livelihoods and human well being, and  resilience to climate change, Pimbert said. Following the food crisis in 2008 there is a major push for  a 'new green revolution' in Africa, championed by the  Alliance for a Green Revolution in Africa (AGRA) a $400  million effort headed by Kofi Annan, former secretary- general of the United Nations and funded by the Gates  Foundation and the Rockrfeller Foundation.   AGRA aims to  double or quadruple the yields of smallholder farms. 'We're are choosing to invest in what we believe will work,'  said Sylvia Mathews Burwell, a member of the AGRA board and  president of the Global Development Program, which is one of  three focus areas for the Gates Foundation. AGRA is putting its funding in the development of new seed  varieties such as drought-tolerant maize, improving soil  fertility and market access and farmer education.  They are  not presently funding genetically engineered crops. 'Farmers want ag research that will help them feed their  families and have extra to sell in the market,' Burwell said  in an interview.  'Our consultants have been out there  talking to farmers.  We're attempting to include the voice of  farmer. 'For many, the AGRA approach is a downscaled version of U. S.   and European agricultural production, with its central focus  on boosting yields with hybrid seeds and fertiliser. AGRA's objective seems to be to make 'farmers dependent on  inputs, dependent on markets, instead of the farmers being  in charge,' said Hans Herren, president of the Millennium  Institute in Virginia.  Herren was the World Food Prize  winner in 1995, and is credited with implementing a  biological control programme that saved the African cassava  crop, averting a food crisis. 'We have seen from the example in the U. S.  and EU where this  dependency leads. . . fewer farmers, lower prices for farmers… more jobless people,' said Herren, who was co chair of  International Assessment of Agricultural Science and  Technology for Development (IAASTD). The three-year IAASTD concluded the best hope for the  feeding the world was with agro-ecosystems that married food  production with ensuring water supplies remain clean,  preserving biodiversity, and improving the livelihoods of  the poor.  The transformation that African agriculture needs  is not more large-scale industrial farm production relying  on outside inputs of fertiliser but with small farmers  practising a multifunctional agro-ecosystem approach, Herren  said. 'Smallholders and their authentic organisations (co-ops,  small rural technical schools, and the like) have shown that  strengthened agro-ecological approaches can produce  adequately,' said Philip Bereano of the University of  Washington in Seattle. AGRA has failed to 'consult with smallholders, listen to  their advice, and follow their suggestions,' said Bereano in  an email from Nagoya, Japan.  Bereano is involved with a  citizen's group called AGRA Watch, which says major funders  from the North are pushing an industrial agri-business  development model on Africa. Agribusiness is setting itself up as the solution to the  'food problem' and many governments are listening because  the 2008 food crisis shocked them, said Pimbert.  'Africa has  enormous quantities of land and resources. . . and now there is  a stampede to lock those up. 'AGRA, many scientists and large NGOs believe the business  approach of high-technology and public-private partnerships  is the way to feed Africa, they can't accept the  smallholders' worldview, he said.  What will happen instead  is that smallholders will buy the new hybrid seed,  fertiliser and pesticide on credit, eventually be forced off  their land to repay their debts and end up in the cities,  while large corporate style farms will consolidate  smallholder land. 'This is what happened to many of India's smallholders,'  Pimbert said. 