Forget speculators, forget biofuel farmers.  The real cause behind the permanent  food and agricultural crisis is the imperial food regime, squeezing money out of  agriculture, a Dutch professor says. Last month, the Food and Agriculture Organisation invited experts to talk  about the increasing price of wheat.  'Global cereal demand and production  still appears in balance,' they concluded, 'and there is no indication of an  impending world food crisis. ''Lazy thinking,' says Jan-Douwe van der Ploeg, professor of rural sociology at  Wageningen University in the Netherlands.  'Almost one billion people are  hungry and another one billion are chronically malnourished, while one billion  others are obese.  Isn't this a food crisis? Hunger has always existed, but for  50 years the phenomenon has been global and permanent. 'Behind the food crisis we face a severe agrarian crisis, he says.  'Farmers have  to struggle harder and harder in order to survive, because of low prices and  turbulent markets.  This is a paradox: for consumers prices keep rising, but  for farmers, prices are too low to earn back their investments. 'Where does the difference go to? 'To food empires,' Van der Ploeg says.  'The  market is more and more dominated by industrial trade conglomerates, like  Ahold, Nestle, Cargill, and many more, governing production, processing,  distribution and consumption of food.  Those empires are able to manipulate  markets and squeeze wealth out of agriculture.  In this regime, small  disequilibria in the markets translate into huge price fluctuations. 'Empires don't usually own resources, but control the networks.  'Both farmers  and consumers are dependent on their entry points and exit points.  They can  set standards and prices. ' Governments are called upon not to distort markets  and to liberalize trade, but these empires are the ones that distort the market,  says Van der Ploeg.  'If it's in their financial interest to grow asparagus,  chicken, green beans or flowers in poor countries and sell it to rich countries,  they do it, even if the population is starving. That is not necessarily bad for poor countries, says Anoesjka Aspeslagh,  spokesperson for the Dutch supermarket division of the multinational Ahold.   'Our demand creates thousands of jobs, and income for people in the  exporting countries.  Especially because we cooperate very closely with  producers to improve labour conditions and living standards. 'Van der Ploeg points to the side effects.  'Peru, for example, was turned into  the world's biggest asparagus exporter.  The country, however, is very  desertous, so the local farmers are deprived of their much-needed water.   Besides, the situation is not stable.  Now already the asparagus production is  shifting to China. 'Aspeslagh does not accept such views.  'We are not as powerful as people  often think.  We don't set prices and standards, we are as subject to the market  and to government regulations as anyone.  That's why it's in the interest of  both us and the producers to build stable relationships and to both agree on  prices.  If China becomes cheaper, we don't move all of a sudden.  That's not  the way we work. ''Yet supermarkets have become the most powerful players among the food  empires,' says Myriam Vander Stichele, senior researcher at the Centre for  Research on Multinational Corporations in Amsterdam.  'They have acquired a  very strong role as gatekeeper between consumers and the processing  industry.  For example, even the big banana multinationals have to accept low  prices and short-term contracts nowadays.  Moreover, many supermarkets are  now becoming producers as well, making them even more powerful. 'Their power is not just economic, but also political.  'They lobby like hell  against stricter regulator,' says Stichele.  There's really a lack of good  regulation on the contracts between supermarkets and other companies. 'The power of food empires is worrying, says Van der Ploeg, because their only  interest is cash flow.  'They have to pay off their debts, created to acquire  other companies and to monopolise large segments of the global food supply  chain.  Expansion is the keyword.  This debt made some companies almost  stumble over their own legs, as Parmalat did. ' This Italian food empire left a  total debt of 14 billion euros. The imperial, or 'corporate', food regime also affects farmers.  Food empires  prefer large-scale industrial farming, for its predictable and standardised  output.  However, not only are these industrial farms often less productive and  less efficient than the small farms they replace, they appear to be extremely  vulnerable to economic shocks.  'The companies are highly dependent on  stability, easy credit and ongoing growth,' says Van der Ploeg.  'When this  disappears, as now is the case, they go broke. 'Governments and researchers are quick to call on technological innovation to  boost production, especially in developing countries.  'They are almost autistic  in their simplistic solutions.  They don't see that hi-tech systems are the very  reason that farmers are competed away. 'The division between entrepreneurial farming and peasant-like farming is  growing, says Van der Ploeg.  'Fortunately, more and more farmers  acknowledge that farming is more than producing commodities.  They look for  an integrated, multifunctional approach and become less dependent on  articificial resources. ' This is a trend in developing and developed countries alike.  'In western  Europe, multifunctional farming already creates billions of euros of added  value, in a sector that stagnates as a whole.  In Brazil it's the same: while some  farms keep growing bigger, the number of small farms has increased from  3. 6 to 4. 2 million in the last eight years. 'This is a very important undercurrent, according to Van der Ploeg, who warns  that the food empires have no future.  'With their short-term policies they  undermine the very agriculture they need.  It's very dangerous, but eventually  they will collapse. ' 