Seventeen years ago it seemed like an impossible dream to provide thousands of  low-income farmers with a way to borrow small amounts of money.  But people  working in the tea sector in the rural areas of central Kenya were determined to  address farmers’ lack of access to credit.  They started the Muramati Savings and  Credit Cooperative Society. According to Joseph Ngaai, who is the chairperson of Muramati, a group of  tea factory directors, tea board members and officials working with small- scale farmers noticed the difficulties the farmers had in accessing banking  services.  The Muramati Savings and Credit Cooperative (SACCO) Society was  started by pooling resources to create a financial base for small-scale  farmers.  Most of Kenya’s population live in rural areas.  Many are small-scale farmers  battling with poor infrastructures, illiteracy, risky economic ventures and low  profitability.  SACCOs have grown in prominence in Kenya, filling the gap left  by risk-averse banks.  SACCOs are democratic organisations owned, managed and governed by  members.  Money is pooled and members agree to make it available to each  other at reasonable interest rates. 'We wanted to offer lending services to farmers at minimal costs.  We had no  office to operate from but we used mobile cash points from where farmers  were paid their money,' Ngaai explains.  The vernacular word 'muramati'  symbolises stewardship, confidence, care and being 'someone else’s keeper'. A far cry from its humble beginnings in office space 'borrowed' from  someone, a capital base of 500 dollars and almost no staff, Muramati SACCO  Society has managed to recruit over 70,000 members, mostly farmers, and is  now moving into urban centres. The east African country’s government has prioritised quasi-banking  institutions in its ambitious plan called 'Kenya Vision 2030'.  The government  regards such institutions as a tool to achieving the United Nations’  millennium development goals. Lawrence Munyua from Murang’a District in central Kenya believes his  success as a farmer hinged on Muramati’s support.  He joined the society in  2008: 'Muramati helped us out when most farmers in central Kenya were  frustrated with poor payments in the tea sector.  Hundreds had uprooted their  stems for other food crops that they thought could work as substitutes,'  Munyua told IPS. With the society’s support, farmers diversified their farming methods.  Many  moved into dairy production and bought goats and cows.  'Muramati at the  same time educated farmers on basic savings methods', says Munyua. Munyua explains that farmers sometimes need credit quickly and that  SACCOs are able to process applications fast.  It should be noted, however,  that new Muramati members can access only small loans in the first six  months after joining.  Munyua enthuses that, 'I managed to educate all my children; and to buy a  piece of land and a vehicle with the loans'. Tea farmer Mary Wangeci confirms that SACCOs transform poor people’s  lives.  'They listen to you when you present your problems to them,' she told  IPS on the phone from her farm in Thika in central Kenya. SACCOs are Kenya’s fastest growing financial services.  According to the  minister of cooperatives, Joseph Nyagah, they presently account for savings of  about 2. 2 billion dollars, which represents 32 percent of national savings. Previously, many SACCOs in Kenya had collapsed due to financial  mismanagement of funds and poor decision-making.  The Kenyan government passed a law in 2008 to ensure prudent financial  services management at SACCOs.  Earlier in 2010, the government put in  place the SACCO regulatory authority.  The 2008 act empowers this body to  license and regulate operations of deposit-taking cooperative groups. Tony Mwangi, Muramati managing director, told IPS that SACCOs have gained  their market share despite stiff competition from existing financial  institutions.  'The financial position of SACCOs is on the ‘up’.  They are able to  lend an average of 12. 3 million dollars annually to their members,' says  Mwangi.  SACCOs are extending their range of services as mobile phone banking takes  off.  Muramati plans to give members basic education on using information  and communication technologies, including using automated teller machines  and banking on the internet and per short messages using mobile phones.  