The accelerating destruction of natural habitats will take  millions of years to recover from, scientists have warned.   This may be the last chance to apply the brakes, Achim  Steiner, executive director of the U. N.  Environment Programme,  reminded delegates representing the 193 member countries of  the U. N.  Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD). 'This meeting is being held to address a very simple fact:  we are destroying life on this Earth,' Steiner said at the  opening plenary meeting Monday.  'It is absolutely essential  that nations work together here. 'Ryu Matsumoto, Japan's environment minister, warned that the  world was about to reach a threshold where the loss of  biodiversity would become irreversible. 'We're now close to a tipping point on biodiversity,' he  said.  'We may cross that in the next 10 years. 'With 16,000 participants, the Oct.  18-29 gathering is by far  the biggest international meeting on biodiversity.  The term  biodiversity refers to the variety of plants, animals and  other species that provide a wide range of services to  humanity. Insect pollinators, including bees, provide services worth  an estimated $211 billion annually, representing close to 10  percent of the world's agricultural output for human food.  A  new estimate puts the cost of the loss of biodiversity and  ecosystems to the human race at $2 trillion to $5 trillion a  year. Despite the trillions of dollars of natural services at  risk, countries failed to meet their 2010 target of  substantially reversing the rate of loss of species.  'Let us  have the courage to look in the eyes of our children and  admit that we have failed, individually and collectively,'  said Ahmed Djoghlaf, executive secretary of the CBD. 'If we allow the current trends to continue we shall soon  reach a tipping point with irreversible and irreparable  damage to the capacity of the planet to continue sustaining  life on Earth,' Djoghlaf told delegates. 'This is indeed a defining moment in the history of  mankind,' he concluded. Despite the high stakes and passionate words, there is no  guarantee that countries will agree to a strong agreement to  curb the loss of biodiversity by 2020. Without a fair and equitable access and benefit-sharing  protocol (ABS), there will be no agreement, said Gurdial  Singh Nijar, the Malaysian delegate representing the Like- Minded Asia-Pacific group. Many drugs, cosmetics and other valuable biochemicals used  in the industrial world have been derived from plants and  animals, very often from countries in the developing world.   Everyone agrees countries and communities where these  originated should be compensated.  The devil is in the  details, and those have been under negotiation for more than  six years and remain contentious and complex. 'We cannot leave out derivative products including  biochemicals,' Nijar said.  In addition to the materials, the  knowledge of the use of such plants and animals in many  cases originates with indigenous people and that must be  part of a new agreement. 'If you use traditional knowledge instead of looking for a  needle in the haystack you get the needle put on a pin  cushion,' said Christine von Weizsacker in reference to  benefiting from indigenous peoples' knowledge. Thorny issues remain regarding how far down the deriviate  chain ought to be compensated, patent issues, and figuring  out a workable system for compliance including customs  checkpoints, von Weizsacker, a spokesperson for the CBD  Alliance, an umbrella of international non-governmental  organisations, said in a press conference. 'Poor people need legal protections,' she said. Without an ABS agreement, countries have shut down access to  their genetic resources, says U. N.  Environment Programme  spokesperson Nick Nuttall.  A fly that is decimating the  Kenyan mango has a natural predator in Asia but researchers  can't obtain it until there is new protocol, he told IPS. 'This is the golden chance to get an ABS agreement,' Nuttall  said. But to reach agreement participants need to rise above the  complex details and set basic ground rules.  Afterwards  adjustments or changes can be made as problems or issues  arise, as has been done under other U. N.  agreements. 'Are the risks so high that we can't agree? We're worse off  without an agreement, in my view,' Nuttall said. 