Embarrassing retractions of scientific papers and a thinly-disguised report  favouring introduction of genetically modified crops by the country's top science  academies have revived calls for more stringent action against plagiarism and  unethical practices. India's scientific community professed shock to see three retraction notices  published in the November-December 2010 issue of  'Biotechnology  Advances', a prestigious international scientific journal, against three papers  presented to it by Indian scientists.   Among the papers retracted is 'Microbial production of dihydroxyacetone'  published by  Biotechnology Advances (BA) in July-August 2008 and authored by Ruchi  Mishra, Seema Rani Jain and Ashok Kumar of the department of biological  sciences and bioengineering, Indian Institute of Technology (IIT) at Kanpur. A  group of 16 autonomous engineering and technology institutes IITs are  deemed to be of national importance by parliament and are known worldwide  for producing highly skilled scientists and engineers.   The reason given by BA for the retraction was that ''the authors have  plagiarised part of several papers that had already appeared in several  journals'' when ''one of the conditions of submission of a paper for  publication is that authors declare explicitly that their work is original and has  not appeared in a publication elsewhere. ''BA goes on to say that the ''article represents a severe abuse of the scientific  publishing system.  The scientific community takes a very strong view on this  matter and we apologise to the readers of the journal that this was not  detected during the submission process. ''Similar reasons were given for withdrawing 'Molecular imprinting in sol-gel  matrix', by  Radha Gupta and Ashok Kumar, also of IIT Kanpur, and published by BA in  November-December 2008.  In a statement issued Oct.  10, Sanjay Dhande, director of IIT Kanpur,  announced that a three-member panel would examine the plagiarism charges  and submit a report to the board of governors by Nov.  2. ''We have a serious problem with plagiarism and no institute is ready to  acknowledge it,''  said K. L.  Chopra, a former director of the IIT at Kharagpur  and now president of the  Society for Scientific Values, an independent  watchdog that boasts membership of 363 of India's leading scientists.  Chopra told IPS that India was only one of several countries, including China,  where plagiarism was rampant.  ''The difference is that countries like China  take stringent action against scientists who get caught. ''At the beginning of the year two Chinese university lecturers were sacked two  weeks  after the journal 'Acta Crystallographica Section E', published by the  International Union of Crystallography, a non-profit, global scientific union,  withdrew papers submitted by them on grounds of plagiarism.  In India, Chopra said, the problem was more with the smaller and less well- known institutions whose scientists sent up papers to international journals  for publication without proper peer review.  Indeed, a third paper retracted by BA, 'Nanosilver - the burgeoning  therapeutic molecule and its green synthesis', was sent up by scientists from  the biotechnology department of the relatively obscure Kalasalingam  University in southern Tamil Nadu state.   ''Scientists are under pressure to publish and too often resort to cut-and- paste from the  Internet in the mistaken belief that they are not going to get  caught,'' Chopra said.  India urgently needs to ''set up a quasi-judicial body  which can blacklist or otherwise take action against unethical scientists. ''Chopra said that instances of plagiarism are high in India because the country  faced a set of problems peculiar to it.  ''India is a poor country with great social  disparites, but it also happens to rank among the scientifically and  technologically advanced countries. ''He referred to a row over over a report favouring quick commercial release of   genetically modified (GM) brinjal (eggplant or aubergine), jointly presented on  Sep.  24 to Jairam Ramesh, Minister for Environment, by six of India's top  scientific academies. Parts of the inter-academy report turned out to be have been copied from a  pro-GM  paper funded by Monsanto, the United States-based biotechnology  giant.  .  Ramesh quickly dismissed the report -- by the Indian Academy of Sciences,  Indian National Academy of Engineering, Indian National Science Academy,  National Academy of Agricultural Sciences, National Academy of Medical  Sciences and National Academy of Sciences -- saying it was ''not a product of  rigorous scientific evaluation. 'Compelled to respond to the ministerial rebuke, Mamannamama Vijayan, who  coordinated the report, issued a statement on behalf of the academies  admitting to the ''inappropriateness'' of copying text without citations or  references.  He said the report would be reviewed but also that it was ''very  unlikely that the recommendations (on GM brinjal) will change. '''There is a lesson here for the academics,'' said Chopra.  ''They may have  harmed rather than helped the cause of introducing GM crops in this country  with a shoddily produced report. '' The anti-GM lobby quickly seized the advantage.  On Oct.  18 a group of 14  non-government organisations jointly petitioned Prime Minister Manmohan  Singh demanding that the presidents of the six academies be sacked for  demonstrating ''inherent scientific bias that can have a serious impact on the  future of Indian science as well as its relevance to the needs of the country. '' The petitioners pointed out that the president of the National Academy of  Agricultural Sciences, Mangala Raid, is on the board of the Indo-U. S.   Knowledge Initiative in Agriculture, Research and Marketing which has been  ''aggressively pushing GM crop research in India. ''''In an age where science and technology play an important role in socio- economic development, this country needs to encourage excellence and ensure  accountability,''  Devinder Sharma, one of the petitioners said.  ''India needs to  be especially careful since  it openly aspires to be a world leader in science  and technology. '' 