Amidst fears of a recurring food crisis, the World Bank has  reactivated its Global Food Crisis Response Programme (GFRP),  dedicating up to 760 million dollars to countries at risk of  food price volatility. In announcing the programme's extension, World Bank  President Robert Zoellick cited 'growing concern among  countries about continuing volatility and uncertainty in  food markets'. The programme, equipped with a wide array of options for  food crisis response, is expected to enable the World Bank  to respond more quickly if countries are facing dangerous  prices spikes. 'World food price volatility remains significant and, in  some countries, the volatility is adding to already higher  local food prices due to other factors such as adverse  weather,' Zoellick said. The Bank's decision follows a number of disquieting  indicators that food prices could reach the dangerous levels  of 2007 to 2008, when riots broke out in several hunger- stricken countries and the number of people suffering from  hunger reached record highs. 'We do expect high volatility in food prices to continue  until at least 2015, so reactivating the Bank's food crisis  fund means we're ready to help countries calling for  assistance,' said World Bank Managing Director Ngozi Okonjo- Iweala. The GFRP was originally launched in May 2008 and, to date,  has conducted 1. 2 billion dollars worth of assistance  operations, reaching 35 countries, especially in the most  affected regions in Africa and Asia, according to the Bank.   It says that external donors have also funded an additional  200 million dollars of operations. The ways in which countries may choose to deploy funds  include support for local food production such as supplying  seeds and fertiliser or improving irrigation, social safety  net programmes, or budget support to offset tariff  reductions. The agricultural aspects of the programme have reached 5. 9  million households while the social protection programmes  have reached over 5. 6 million people, said Mark Cackler,  manager of the Bank's Agriculture and Rural Development  Department. 'In the last two years the GFRP has been effective at  catalyzing and targeting funding for food security and  agriculture at a critical time,' Cackler told IPS in an  email, citing concern over food price volatility as the  reason for extending the programme. Not new moneyThe programme is not an extra fund that would provide  funding on top of that to which countries are already  entitled.  Rather, the 760 million dollars will come from  money already destined for countries through the Bank's low- income country lending programme, the International  Development Association (IDA), or its middle-income  programme, the International Bank for Reconstruction and  Development (IBRD). It will, however, allow money needed for the immediate needs  of the people most vulnerable to the effects of rapid food  price rises to be made available much sooner than IDA or  IBRD funds normally would be. This authority to 'fast-track' funds under the GFRP had  expired on Jun.  30, but the vote by the Bank's executive  board to extend the programme, announced Monday, extends  this authority to Jun.  30, 2011. Ultimately, though, minimising the impacts of food price  volatility on vulnerable populations will require increased  investment in women and smallholder farmers, says Neil  Watkins, director of policy and campaigns at ActionAid. 'To the extent that countries are responding to a crisis  that is largely external,' he says, 'we don't think loans  are the appropriate tool. 'He says grants, especially for the poorest countries, would  be better.  It should be noted that while money coming  through IBRD would be loans, that through IDA is usually  termed 'credits', with no interest and long repayment  periods. Watkins sees the food price volatility acknowledged in the  Bank's GFRP announcement as a product of an international  market that is increasingly affected by demand for biofuels  such as corn-derived ethanol and subject to the whims of  commodity traders. 'As more and more investors get involved in commodity  markets, [food markets] are being pulled away from real  purchasers and sellers and more into the financial world,'  he says. World Bank emerging as significant agricultural  lenderBut he thinks institutions are beginning to understand how  they can help make communities less vulnerable to the whims  of international markets: invest in smallholder farmers that  produce food locally for their communities. For its part, the World Bank seems to be playing a key role  in these efforts.  As the trustee of the Global Agriculture  and Food Security Programme (GAFSP), launched in April, it  facilitates a programme focused on long-term solutions to  what are turning out to be recurring food crises.  The money  for GASFP comes from donor countries and the Gates  Foundation and is in addition to any Bank loans or grants. Watkins, who is on the steering committee of GAFSP as a  civil society representative, says the programme 'is one  fund where you can tell the money that is being delivered is  new money.  One of the challenges of pledges in the past has  been you can't tell what pledges are new money and what is  just being redirected from previous commitments. 'And ahead of the Millennium Development Goals summit at the  United Nations in September the Bank announced it was  increasing its agricultural lending to 8. 3 billion dollars a  year, 45 percent of which would be through IDA. Chris Delgado, a strategy and policy adviser in the Bank's  Agriculture and Rural Development Department who coordinates  GFRP and is programme manager for GAFSP, told IPS following  that announcement that he expected agriculture and rural  lending to continue to increase in future years.  In 1980, he  said, it was 30 percent of total Bank lending, then dipped  to seven percent around the start of this decade before  rebounding to about 12 percent now. Watkins says the Bank is 'showing some promise' as a place  where country-led proposals for smallholder farming can find  a home. 