With one death and several injured to show for it, two regions in southern Peru  remain tangled in conflict over water from one of the country's main rivers.  A  project would divert some of the river's flow from the Cuzco region to  neighbouring Arequipa. Apurímac is a 700-kilometre river whose name in the Quechua language  means 'great speaker. ' This corner of the Amazon basin has pitted officials  and residents from one region against their neighbours, while development  proponents and environmentalists differ on the pros and cons of the plan. The dispute, further complicated by the lawsuits filed by the two regions,  could be resolved by a detailed hydraulic record of the river.  The regional and  municipal authorities caught up in the conflict demand that the national  government conduct an independent water study. The origin of the clash lies in Arequipa's Majes Siguas II irrigation and energy  project, southwest of Cuzco, which depends on water diverted from the  Apurímac. On Thursday, Oct.  21, the government of President Alan García will hold a  meeting with officials and leaders from the province of Espinar, located in the  Cuzco region, with the promise to assess whether that part of the country has  enough water that it can be diverted to the project in Arequipa. A water inventory study would allow a detailed analysis of availability of water  from the Apurímac River, from its source on the Andean mountain Nevado  Mismi to its confluence with the Salado River. Jorge Villasante, minister of production and head of the government's high- level commission, 'has pledged to carry out the study and we demand that he  keep his word,' said Eloy Chancayauri, mayor of Espinar, the province situated  in the far southeast of Cuzco region. The provincial mayor told IPS that an additional demand is that 'an  independent institution conduct the study and with total transparency. '  Espinar's residents staged protests against the project in September, in which  one person was killed and at least a dozen were wounded.  With the existing  plan, Espinar would be the province most affected by the water diversion. Villasante met with Espinar officials on Oct.  14 and visited part of the  Apurímac watershed.  Two days earlier he had promised that the project would  come about only if 'there are guarantees of availability of the resources  needed. ' The project involves diverting water from up in the mountains through  tunnels and canals to the Majes and Siguas plains in Arequipa, a region with  an extensive coastline on the Pacific Ocean. It would cost 404 million dollars and includes the construction of the  Angostura dam, which Arequipa authorities say would have a storage capacity  of one billion cubic metres of water. Espinar province (in the Cuzco region) has reason to be alarmed about the  project.  Residents already face water problems and fear being left without any  by the Majes Siguas II project, in the adjacent province of Caylloma, in the  Arequipa region. According to the mayor, the flow of the Apurímac River -- which supplies the  municipalities in Espinar -- historically has been 3. 8 cubic metres per  second, and the dam would reduce it to 1. 14 cubic metres per second.  'That  is not enough to meet our needs,' he said. Arequipa and Cuzco have turned to the courts.  Espinar filed an injunction with  a provincial court that issued a resolution, in 2008, in which it demands an  environmental impact study and water inventory study before allowing the  Majes Siguas II project to go forward.  In September, Cuzco officials were able to convince two courts to order a  suspension of the project's concession process and prevent the signing of the  project's contract.  From the other side, the regional government of Arequipa filed a claim with  the department's Superior Court to allow the signing of the contract with the  recipient of the concession, the privately held Angostura-Siguas Consortium.   The petition has already been accepted.  In the view of the government's National Water Authority (ANA), there is  enough water for both regions. A comparison study of supply and demand, conducted by the consultancy  Agua y Agro at the behest of the ANA, states that the flow of water from the  upper basin of the Apurímac during the rainy season is one billion cubic  metres per year, from the source to the confluence with the Salado River. The report assures that if the natural discharges of the watershed are taken  into account, from the upper river to the inlet of Canchipuquio, which  captures part of its water, the annual water supply is around 500 million cubic  metres.  ANA representatives assured that Espinar's water demand is 5 million cubic  metres for agricultural and household use, for a surplus of 495 million cubic  metres of water resources per year, which now end up flowing eastward  through the Amazon to the Atlantic.  But Cuzco authorities and some experts argue that a comparison study is not  the same as the water inventory, through which 'over the course of a year, we  can determine in a detailed way the availability of water in periods of rain or  drought. ''Furthermore, that study does not take into account our observations,' said  Chancayauri. 'A supply-demand comparison is an initial study because it provides general  information, but not specifics.  It can be useful for small projects,' said  agricultural engineer Francisco Soto, executive director of IPROGRA, a non- governmental organisation active in water management issues. ANA technicians told IPS that for the comparison study they worked with a  water history of the area dating from 1962 to 2006.  'From that, we took an  average flow to determine the variation.  A detailed report was elaborated, the  only difference from the inventory is the name,' said one. In an IPS interview, representatives from Agua y Agro, speaking for  themselves and anonymously, said that due to the conflict, they had to look  for additional water sources -- in other words, new dams -- to meet the  request of the Cuzco consumers. So far, ANA has identified three structures for storing water with a capacity of  90 million cubic metres. The government agency recognises that the rural areas of Espinar get their  water from the Apurímac River, whose flow would be diverted to the project,  but assures that it is not the case for the urban areas, which have other  sources of water. IPROGA's Soto stressed that Peru's water resources law establishes that  'priority for use should be the human consumer.  The authorities must not  forget that. 'Luis Calle, coordinator of the Arequipa regional technical committee, told IPS  that the Majes Siguas II project would generate development for the entire  Peruvian south. 'Those from Cuzco are just guessing; their fear is baseless,' said Calle, and  said that in the area of 38,000 hectares that will be irrigated with project  water there will be a city of 250,000 inhabitants, and included in the area:  Cuzco farmers.  