Pakistan’s recent catastrophic floods has had many alternately  worried and depressed, but the indigenous community that calls  the mudflats between the creeks of the Indus delta home has  been having a decidedly far different reaction.    Flashing a smile that reveals a mouth stained red from  years of chewing ‘ghutka’ (a concoction of tobacco, betel  nut and flavourings), 70-something Ayub Dablo says: 'With so  much sweet water, our land will become green again. '    Dablo lives with his extended family in Trippin, a small  village on the mudflats of Hajamro Creek in the Indus delta,  just where the 3,200-km long Indus River meets the Arabian  Sea.  Around the village here in Sindh province, which has  about 50 people, a large swathe of fertile soil stands  barren.     After an unprecedented spate of torrential rains in  late  July, floods inundated a fifth of Pakistan, affecting 18  million people.  But as the government continues to scramble  to help the hundreds of thousands of people who remain  homeless because of the floods, the mood here is all  sunshine.    Trippin villager Ismail Janyaro’s leathery face breaks  into a hundred lines as he beams at visitors.  'God has  finally heard us,' he says, waving an arm at the parched  land around him.  'We’ve been waiting for this spurt of fresh  water for over a decade now. '   His words are echoed by Tahir Qureshi, senior advisor of  the Coastal Ecosystem, Coastal and Marine Programme run by  the International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN).   'No doubt the floods have brought much misery along the  Indus,' says Qureshi, 'but as an environmentalist, I find it  a blessing in disguise. ' Now, he says, the riverine  agriculture and the fisheries will thrive.    Bakhshal Lashari, director of the Institute of Irrigation  and Drainage Engineering at Mehran University of  Engineering, in Jamshoro, Sindh, also says that these floods  will benefit the delta for at least two or three years.  'The  recharge of groundwater near the coastal area will not allow  the sea to move upward,' he says.    Fisher Mohammad Hassan Khaskehli  swears that if the  river waters the delta uninterrupted, Pakistan would never  have to import grain.     The Indus delta, home to the sixth largest mangrove  forest in the world, spans some 600,000 hectares along the  coast of Sindh province.  It has 17 major creeks and  innumerable minor ones, as well as mudflats.  It has been  declared a Ramsar Site — a wetland habitat with species of  international importance — and has a wildlife sanctuary.     According to the Ministry of Environment, mangroves here  used to cover a total of 26,000 square kilometres.  But  natural causes and human exploitation reduced freshwater  supply to the area, in turn resulting in the depletion of  the mangrove areas to just 2,600 sq km.    Seeing the swollen Indus, Janyaro, 74, is reminded of the  old days and recalls, 'The delta was once very fertile and  lush.  There were acres of banana plantations, red rice  paddies, olive trees, coconut trees. '    That was also a time when migratory birds like the red  cranes, swans, and geese came to the delta in droves, says  veteran journalist Iqbal Khwaja, who has roots in Sindh.  He  says that the degradation of mangrove forests, loss of fresh  water supply, and the change in climatic pattern not only  disturbed the nesting and breeding patterns of birds, but  also resulted in the birds changing their routes completely.    Optimism, however, has come to the delta since the recent  floods.  Says Mohammad Ali Shah, head of the non-government  organisation Pakistan Fisherfolk Forum: 'The delta’s sagging  ecology has been revived.  Since the early 1990s, the water  coming from the Indus to this part of the country was a mere  trickle or sometimes not even that.  The recent deluge has  recharged the aquifers and replenished the fish stock. '   Still, he cautions that while this one-time injection of  fresh water will keep the delta in good health for some  time, what is needed really is 'a constant supply of fresh  water'.     Engineer Lashari also says that to control seawater  ingress, a minimum supply of river water is a must.     Over the years, manmade irrigation networks (of which the  Indus Basin has one of the largest in the world) and  hydropower dams had drained the Indus, allowing little water  to reach the sea.  This resulted in the sea intruding  inwards.  According to Qureshi, the sea has come '54  kilometres upstream along the main course of the Indus into  Sindh. '   Delta people like Dablo themselves know that a continuous  flow of sweet water into the Arabian Sea is needed to  breathe life back into the delta.  Or as Dablo puts it, 'When  the sweet and salty water mix, it gives sustenance to the  delta. '    There are many benefits of fresh river water flowing into  the sea, explains IUCN’s Qureshi.  For example, he says, 'it  maintains the salinity level in the sea, and gives a boost  to the marine food web'.     'Flood water also brings with it huge quantities of  sediment rich in nutrients,' adds Lashari.  'This silt not  only pushes the seawater back, but also increases the  fertility of the soil so important for sea organisms. '     Khwaja observes, though, that with the recent floods, the  topography and geography of the creeks have also changed  markedly.  He comments, 'This may mean some (human)  settlements may have to be relocated. '  