Blame Canada if countries fail to agree to a new binding  treaty to curb the rapid loss of plant, animal and species  that form the intricate web of life that sustains humanity.   That is the view of indigenous representatives from Canada in  response to a late night move by the Canadian delegation to  strike a reference to indigenous peoples' rights at the U. N.   Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD) members' conference  here. 'Canada is stalling progress here, weakening our rights and  fighting against a legally-binding protocol on access and  benefit sharing,' said Armand MacKenzie, executive director  of the Innu Council of Nitassinan, the indigenous  inhabitants in northeastern Canada. 'Their opposition threatens global biodiversity. . .  people  need to speak out,' MacKenzie told IPS. A protocol on access and benefit sharing (ABS) without a  guarantee of the rights of indigenous people and local  communities 'would be totally void', said Paulino Franco de  Carvalho, head of the Brazilian delegation. 'Brazil will not accept any agreement on biodiversity  without a fair ABS protocol. . . .  We are not bluffing on that,  I must be very clear,' Franco de Carvalho said in a press  conference. An ABS protocol is one of the three legs of the CBD 'stool'  - a new international agreement to halt the loss of  biodiversity.  The second leg is a strategic plan with 20  specific targets to be achieved by 2020, such as no net  deforestation and the elimination of harmful subsidies.  The  third is the mobilisation of sufficient financial and other  resources to support the other two. ABS refers to way in which the genetic material in plants,  animals and microbes can be used for food, medicines,  industrial products, cosmetics and other goods.  The use of  such materials owes a great deal to the traditional  knowledge of indigenous peoples.  Access refers to how such  genetic material is obtained, and benefit sharing means how  the benefits, financial and otherwise, of their use are  distributed. Indigenous peoples say they are holders or caretakers of  much of the world's biodiversity and traditional knowledge,  and omitting references to that reality is a non-starter for  them and most countries. 'The Canadian government has been undermining the human  rights of the world's indigenous peoples since 2006, at home  and internationally,' said Paul Joffe representing the Grand  Council of the Crees, a large indigenous nation in central  Canada. Canadian indigenous representatives have expressed their  views to the Canadian delegation but the Canadian government  position is that there can be no reference to the rights of  indigenous people in the final ABS protocol, Joffe told IPS. 'The government never consulted with us.  It came as a  complete surprise,' he said. Few indigenous representatives are in attendance because  Canada and many other governments do not provide financial  assistance so that they can attend the conference as  observers.  Indigenous peoples have no official role here and  can only offer their views when requested. 'We are at the mercy of state governments,' said Ellen  Gabriel, president of the Quebec Native Women Association.   'Indigenous people are utterly dependent on biodiversity for  their livelihoods. 'Gabriel calls what Canada is doing a 'new form of  colonialism'. 'We are the peoples with the rights to the genetic resources  of biodiversity,' she said. Canada's position reflects an ideology and is a political  decision made by the current government in the capital of  Ottawa, says Joffe.  At previous international meetings,  Canada has been widely if quietly called 'obstructionist'.   At the Copenhagen climate talks last December, international  civil society gave Canada the 'Colossal Fossil Award' for  worst behaviour at those negotiations. Not surprisingly, many United Nations member states declined  to support Canada in its bid to get a highly prized seat at  the Security Council earlier this month. Joffe maintains this negotiation is simply politics for  Canada's government and it will take political and public  pressure on the Stephen Harper government.  However, at this  point there are no Canadian media in Nagoya nor are any  registered, according to organisers. For his part, Brazil's Franco de Carvalho is optimistic an  ABS agreement can be reached by the end of next week at the  conference conclusion when more than 120 ministers of the  environment are expected to be in Nagoya to sign a new  international agreement. 'I think we could find a good result,' he said. 