Damming a river may bring electric power, but it often comes  at the price of high-quality food fisheries, experts say.  When  dams are proposed for power, flood control or irrigation, the  often devastating impacts on fisheries in rivers and lakes are  ignored or discounted. 'It is very difficult to put a dollar value on what inland  fisheries represent because it is much more than the landed  value of the fish at the dock,' says Yumiko Kura of the  WorldFish Center office in Phnom Penh, Cambodia. Kura is co-author of a new report, 'Blue Harvest: Inland  Fisheries as an Ecosystem Service', which highlights the  wide-ranging importance of inland fisheries in diets,  especially among children, and not just in terms of protein  but in supplying micronutrients, notably vitamin A, calcium,  iron and zinc. 'Detailed studies in Bangladesh for example have shown that  daily consumption of small fish contributes 40 percent of  the total daily household requirement of vitamin A and 31  percent of calcium,' according the report released Friday at  a side event at the 10th Conference of the Parties to the  Convention on Biological Diversity. In addition, it notes there are more than 60 million full-  and part-time jobs in fishing and other activities such as  processing, with over half these jobs carried out by women. A river system like the Mekong is amongst the most  productive fisheries in the world largely because there are  few dams, and it retains most of its wetlands, Kura told  IPS.  Fishers in the Mekong catch more than 500 species of  fish - its very diversity sustains the health of the river,  and some 22 million people in Cambodia and Laos who depend  on the Mekong's bounty. By contrast river systems in developed countries are near  biological deserts with few species, according to a landmark  study published in the journal Nature earlier this month.   Paradoxically, rich countries employ vast quantities of  concrete for energy and flood control, decimating rivers'  natural abilities to control and clean water and provide  food, according to the first ever study of the world's river  systems. 'What made our jaws drop is that some of the highest threat  levels in the world are in the United States and Europe,'  Peter McIntyre, a co-author of the Nature report and  zoologist at the University of Wisconsin-Madison in the  U. S. , told IPS in a previous story. Fish also serve as important links between ecosystems.  The  nutrients and organic matter from fish eggs, carcasses and  excretion help to support the production of algae, insect  larvae and other fish species in rivers and lakes, says the  'Blue Harvest' report compiled by the U. N.  Environment  Programme (UNEP) and the World Fish Centre. When fish populations decline, there can be serious knock-on  effects for other organisms, said Jacqueline Alder, head of  marine and coastal ecosystems at UNEP.  Widespread mortality  of the cisco fish from Lake Mendota in the U. S. , for  example, led to changes in the plankton composition of the  lake, decreased the level of nutrients in the water column  and caused a decline in the biomass of algae. 'Unlike oceans, inland waters are highly vulnerable and  changes can come very quickly,' Adler told IPS. The report warns that despite over 40 years of steady  production globally, rapid environmental changes are  occurring which challenge the viability of future fish  stocks and a range of internationally-agreed development  targets including the Millennium Development Goals. Dams, unsustainable agriculture and large removals of water  for industry, along with pollution and wastewater  discharges, have significant impacts on river systems, the  report found. Japan used to have productive inland fisheries but there are  very few left, almost entirely due to development, says  Kura, who is from Japan.  Many of the country's rivers were  lined with concrete in the past two decades in a short- sighted attempt to control flooding and maintain transport  channels.  Rivers need to be able to flow to the sea, with  shoreline vegetation and wetlands to keep them healthy and  productive, she said. Major cities in China's Yangtze River valley such as  Chongqing, Nanjing, Shanghai are adding 25 billion tonnes of  wastewater to the river annually, much of it untreated.   Along with other factors, such as dams and over-abstraction  of water, pollution is linked with a decline in Yangtze fish  catches.  The Chinese sturgeon and the Chinese paddlefish are  now classed as critically endangered. Fish catches in Africa's Lake Malawi and Lake Malombe and in  the Niger River have fallen as a result of dam building and  environmental degradation.  Between 40 and 50 percent of  rivers in Asia, Africa and Latin America are undammed, but  less than 12 percent of large European rivers have water  flow unaffected by dams, the report shows. The Pak Mun dam, built on a tributary of the Mekong River in  Thailand in the early 1990s, triggered a 60 to 80 percent  fall in fish catches.  Proponents said the new reservoir  created by the dam would produce 220kg/hectare of fish, but  this only reached 10kg/hectare. Since 2001, a seasonal flooding policy involving opening the  dam gates has been adopted, helping to bring back close to  130 species to the Mun River and reducing the impact of the  dam on fisheries. However, other dams are being proposed on the Mekong, says  Kura.  The full value of the river's fisheries is difficult  to assess and the value of the landed catch is all that's  being considered.  The impacts on jobs, food security,  culture, healthy and the region's biodiversity aren't  properly considered in regional development plans focused on  energy and irrigation, she said. 'We need to value all the components in the river's  watershed, the landscape and the water work together as one  system,' Kura said. 