While scores of international observers wait on tenterhooks  for the first election in Burma in two decades - and one of  only three multiparty elections in 60 years — a report by the  U. N.  Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights there  suggests that the world need not wait for Nov.  7 to judge the  outcome. 'The election process has been deeply flawed and  disappointing,' Tomas Quintana said this week. Early in September, Burma's military Elections Commissioner  announced that voting will not be held in some 3,300  villages in the Shan state, effectively disenfranchising 1. 5  million voters.  Over 2,000 prisoners of conscience, including Nobel Peace  Prize laureate and opposition leader Aung San Suu Kyi,  continue to languish in prison despite repeated calls from  U. N.  Secretary-General Ban Ki-Moon and others for their  release. The leading opposition party, the National League for  Democracy (NLD), was not even allowed to contest elections  and already more than 20 extrajudicial killings have taken  place. In response to Quintana's report to the Third Committee of  the General Assembly earlier this week, the delegate from  Britain stated that the 'election result is a foregone  conclusion', adding that the international community must  now look beyond the elections and towards options such as  the Commission of Inquiry (CoI), a suggestion put forth on  multiple occasions by the Special Rapporteur.  'A number of member states have expressed support for a  CoI,' Quintana said.  'Others have said that such an  accountability measure will be counterproductive and that  continued engagement would be preferred.  This is a false  dichotomy.  An investigation of this kind would not preclude  international engagement with the new government. 'Despite Quintana's balanced report, public debate among U. N.   member states continues to be dictated not by legal  precedent but rather by regional ties, economic motivations  and political alliances.  According to the most recent figures released by Burma's  Central Statistical Office, Thailand currently receives 52  percent of Burma's exports, India receives 17 percent and  China receives nine percent.  China is also Burma's largest  import source, supplying as much as 32 percent of total  imports.  Thus it came as no surprise that the most outspoken critics  of Quintana's report were the delegates of Thailand, China,  India and Burma itself, all of whom denounced the report as  one-sided and 'biased' and warned that a CoI would only be  'destructive' to the post-election climate. With economic incentives driving superpowers' decisions, the  chances of a CoI mandated by the General Assembly or the  Security Council are slim, despite the backing of the  European Union, Norway and Canada. Some human rights advocates have been adamant that such  self-serving motivations are highly short-sighted.  According  to Debbie Stothard, the executive director of ALTSEAN, the  Alternative Asean Network on Burma, 'The reality is that any  country that wishes to have sustainable trade relations with  Burma has to realise that the international crimes there are  generating instability which is not conducive to trade. ' While the U. N.  balks at the CoI, several experts, including  Professor Tyler Giannini, director of Harvard Law School's  International Human Rights Clinic (IHRC), are keen to deter  what they see as an imminent catastrophe unfurling in Burma.   Addressing a press gathering in early October, Giannini laid  out, in strictly legal terms, the case for a CoI into  possible war crimes and crimes against humanity in Burma. 'We decided to look specifically at only U. N.  documents,'  Giannini said, referring to the IHRC's publication 'Crimes  in Burma'.  'The conclusion was that U. N.  institutions have  consistently acknowledged abuses and used legal terms  associated with international crimes, including that  violations have been 'widespread', 'systematic' or 'part of  a state policy'. ''Based on previous precedent,' Giannini concluded, 'the  U. N. 's next step should be to set up a CoI and that follows  directly from comparisons to Darfur and to Rwanda and to  former Yugoslavia. 'Giannini's allusions to genocide are in line with the  opinions of countless other human rights experts.  'What  we've seen unfolding in Burma over the past few decades has  been a slow burning genocide for several communities,'  Stothard told IPS. 'We've seen what happened in Cambodia,' she added.   'Southeast Asia has already hosted one terrible tragedy.  The  longer the regional and international community refuses to  deal with Burma the longer they condemn our region to yet  another similar situation. 'The Special Rapporteur expressed similar fears about Burma's  future, post-elections.  'It will take a long time for Myanmar to have meaningful  democratic institutions,' Quintana told IPS.  'This country  has been under military government for 40 years.  It is  militarised at every level. 'But while conversations continue in press rooms and  conference halls, the situation on the ground in Burma  becomes more and more intolerable for those living there. Wa Ku Shee, a representative of the Women's League of Burma,  could not hold back her tears during her presentation to the  United Nations Burma Fund in early October.  Haltingly, she described the plight of a mother with two  infants fleeing her village from soldiers.  When her daughter  was shot, she was forced to leave her dying in the forest in  the hopes of carrying her son to safety.  Before she reached  the hospital, her son was shot in the thigh, and eventually  bled to death in her arms. 'The situation of the civilians in the middle of this armed  conflict is extreme,' Quintana told IPS.  'It is not enough  to say we need free and fair elections.  We need to include  justice for past violations in order to deter future  violations and this is a serious challenge. '