Massive slicks of weathered oil were clearly visible near  Louisiana's fragile marshlands in both the East and West Bays  of the Mississippi River Delta during an overflight that  included an IPS reporter on Oct.  23.  The problem is that,  despite this, the Louisiana Department of Wildlife and  Fisheries has left much of the area open for fishing. Four days prior, on Oct.  19, federal on-scene cleanup  coordinator for the BP oil disaster, Coast Guard Rear Adm.   Paul Zukunft, declared there was little recoverable surface  oil in the Gulf of Mexico. Both bays cover an area of roughly 112 square kilometres of  open water that surround the Southwest Pass, the main  shipping channel of the Mississippi River.  While East Bay  remains closed for fishing, West Bay was open for fishing  when IPS spotted the oil on Oct.  23, despite the fact that  the day before a BP oil cleanup crew had reported oil in  West Bay to a local newspaper. 'They are literally shrimping in oil,' Jonathan Henderson,  the Coastal Resiliency Organiser for the environmental group  Gulf Restoration Network, who was also on the flight,  exclaimed as our plane flew over shrimpers trawling in the  oil-covered area. Others remain concerned about the use of toxic dispersants  that BP has used to sink the oil.  'Potential ecosystem collapse caused by toxic dispersant use  during this disaster will have immediate and long-term  effects on the Gulf's traditional fishing communities'  ability to sustain our culture and heritage,' Clint Guidry  of the Louisiana Shrimp Association told IPS. 'This has been an exercise in lessening BP's liability from  day one.  I think we're moving into a situation where the PR  is saying the area is safe to fish and it's safe to eat, but  that's not the reality,' he said. The waters in the East and West Bays are under the  jurisdiction of Louisiana's Department of Wildlife and  Fisheries (LDWF), while waters further from the coast are  under federal jurisdiction.  LDWF does receive input,  however, from the National Oceanic and Atmospheric  Administration. Earlier on the same day IPS spotted the oil, a spotter pilot  for LDWF had flown over the same area and told Southern  Seaplanes there was no oil. 'He is the spotter for LWDF and saw that bay, and it is  still open,' Henderson told IPS.  'He should have closed the  bay for fishing.  So now you can see how sophisticated they  are in tracking this.  Either this guy is completely  incompetent, or has an agenda to keep as much of Louisiana's  waters open for fishing as he can, whether there is oil or  not.  I don't see how he could have flown down there today  and not seen it.  It's criminal. 'When IPS called the LWDF requesting to talk with the LDWF  oil spotter, department officials said 'that person is not  available to comment'. The LWDF website has a number to call in order to report oil  sightings.  When IPS called that number, the call was  answered by a BP response call centre. On Oct.  23, the Coast Guard claimed that the substance  floating in the miles-wide areas of West Bay appeared to be  'an algal bloom'. Lt.  Cmdr.  Chris O'Neil said a pollution investigator for the  Coast Guard collected samples from the area, and while they  had yet to be tested, 'based on his observation and what he  sees in the sample jars, he believes that to be an algal  bloom. 'Fishermen who have traveled through and fished in the area  over the weekend, however, refuted these Coast Guard claims. 'I scooped some up, and it feels like oil, looks like oil,  is brownish red like all the dispersed oil we've been seeing  since this whole thing started,' fisherman David Arenesen,  from Venice, Louisiana, told IPS. 'It doesn't look like algae to me.  Algae doesn't stick on  your fingers, and algae isn't oily,' he said.  'The area of  this stuff spans an area of 30 miles, from Southwest Pass  almost all the way over to Grand Isle, and runs very far  off-shore too.  We rode through it for over 20 miles while we  were going out to fish, I dipped some up, and it's oil. 'Arenesen saw the substance on Friday, the same day it was  reported by the Times Picayune newspaper in New Orleans.  'It was at least an inch thick, and it went on for miles,'  Arenesen said, adding, 'It would be easy to clean since it's  all floating on the surface. 'IPS spoke with Gary Robinson, a hook and line mackerel  commercial fisherman working out of Venice who was also in  the substance in question recently. 'I was out in West Bay on Oct.  22, and I was in this thick  brown foam, about five inches thick, with red swirls of oil  throughout it, and there was a lot of it, at least a 10-mile  patch of it,' Robinson said while speaking to IPS on his  boat.  'I've never seen anything like that foam before, the  red stuff in it was weathered oil, and there was sheen  coming off my boat when I came back into harbor.  I'm  concerned about the safety of the fish I'm catching. 'Dean Blanchard, of Dean Blanchard Seafood Inc.  in Grand  Isle, Louisiana, spoke with IPS about the Coast Guard claim  that the substance was likely algae. 'Hell, we got oil coming in here every day, it's all around  us, we know what oil is,' Blanchard said.  'The Coast Guard  should change the colour of their uniform, since they are  working for BP.  We've known they are working for BP from the  beginning of this thing.  None of us believe anything they  say about this oil disaster anymore. ' 'Everyone, including the feds, are talking about the fact  that less of the oil actually reached the surface than was  below,' Captain Dicky Tupes of Southern Seaplanes told IPS,  'And now we're seeing some of that submerged oil surface  here.  How long will this go on?'The East Bay area appeared to be completely covered in  kilometres-long strands of weathered oil of various colors.   While flying approximately 16 linear kilometres across the  bay, IPS saw nothing but streaks of the substance across the  surface.  'That oil is covering just about the entire length of  Southwest Pass,' Tupes said. A recent month-long cruise by Georgia researchers reported  oil on the sea floor that they suspect is BP's.  While  government officials question whether there is oil on the  sea floor, the Georgia scientists say the samples 'smelled  like an auto repair shop'. The research team took 78 cores of sediment and only five  had live worms in them.  Usually they would all have life,  said University of Georgia scientist Samantha Joye, who went  on to call the affected area a 'graveyard for the  macrofauna'. 'The horrible thing is they've been inundated with this oily  material. . .  There's dead animals on the bottom and it stinks  to high heaven of oil,' Joye added. University of South Florida's Ernst Peebles said the oil on  the floor if the Gulf 'is undermining the ecosystem from the  bottom up'. 