A construction project in Kingston's protected Palisadoes  wetlands is pitting Jamaican environmentalists against the  government in a showdown activists say will end up in the  courts. Scientists and local environmentalists accuse the National  Works Agency (NWA), which is responsible for the  construction, and government's environment watchdog the  National Environment and Planning Agency (NEPA) of ignoring  likely impacts of planned coastal improvement work in the  protected wetlands.  The area is said to be home to more than  300 species of plants and animals, including six native  species of cacti. The public is outraged at what many see as government's  haste to start coastal protection works along a 2. 5- kilometre stretch of the 14-kilometre-long peninsula.   Environmentalists are calling for an Environmental Impact  Assessment study (EIA) and the requisite public consultation  process.  In the absence of details about the planned  development, many are sceptical that a three-year old EIA  for similar work in the area is sufficient. The Palisadoes peninsula links Jamaica's capital city  Kingston to the historic town of Port Royal and the larger  of the island's two international airports. The development area lies within 13,000 hectares of cays,  reefs and mangroves that is also a National Heritage Site  and a Ramsar Wetland of International Importance.  Decades of  development in the capital has severely denuded the mangrove  forests, polluted the waters, destroyed its once  considerable fishery and rendered Kingston's only bathing  beach useless. University of the West Indies scientists Mona Webber and  Karl Aiken are mindful of the benefits of the improved  roadway but remain concerned. In a recent joint article they wrote: 'We feel that the  ecological damage that is being wreaked on the environment  in this special area is considerable and rather risky and  may have significant medium-term negative effects. ' Work to elevate the roadway began in earnest nearly two  months ago with the NWA and NEPA resisting renewed  consultations even though current works vary significantly  from the 2008 plans.  Engineers have questioned the cost of  the project, estimated at $65. 7 million - almost twice 2008  estimates.  And since the plans were also well outside the  original scope of work, environmentalists wanted a new EIA.  The works will destroy two years of mangrove replanting,  intended to restabilise and minimise damage to the sand  dunes during bad weather.  In recent years, extreme weather  events such as Hurricanes Ivan in 2004 and Dean in 2007 have  inundated the roadway.  There is also concern that the  tombolo sandbar, which makes Kingston's the world's seventh  largest natural harbour, is at risk. Transport and works minister Michael Henry has promised that  the project will 'protect the airport and infrastructure  inside the Kingston Harbour', but Webber and Aiken believe  it could 'cost us (Jamaica) dearly in the ecological sense'. 'Impacts are really uncertain, which is the whole point, as  the area is a specially sensitive area,' Aiken told IPS in a  written response. At a public meeting on Oct.  5, NWA's head Patrick Wong, in  an attempt to soothe angry environmentalists, explained that  only two lanes with soft shoulders and not the four lanes  previously announced are being built. Despite variations that include an elevation of additional  0. 4 metres that make it 'less susceptible to flooding', an  additional one kilometre of development and the removal of  several sand dunes, both NEPA and NWA believe there is no  need for a new EIA.  Marine biologist Peter Wilson-Kelly agreed.  In addition to  the EIA, he said NEPA would have been informed by its own  extensive research of the area. 'The problem is that the public at large may not know what  currently pertains…or the mitigation measures being put in  place to minimise the impact on the local environment,' said  Wilson-Kelly, whose firm carried out the original study. The Palisadoes project is part of a five-year Jamaica Road  Development Infrastructure Programme to rehabilitate more  than 570 kilometres of roadways across the island.  It is  funded a $465 million loan from the Chinese Export Import  Bank and a 10-cent per litre tax on petrol. Besides taking NEPA and the NWA to task, environmentalists  point out that a parking area for construction vehicles had  been built inside the habitat of the extremely rare Opuntia  tuna, an endemic species of cactus.  On Sep.  7, within days  of the commencement of work, NEPA served the NWA with a Stop  Order to 'facilitate the demarcation of the working foot  print, and repair a damaged sand dune'.  But also at issue, explained Aiken, a life sciences  lecturer, is the 'loss of much of the smaller biota, mainly  insect and fungi which live in the top few centimetres of  sand which…are usually forgotten in these projects as they  are tiny and out of sight, but whose activities 'run' the  ecosystem'. There is all-around agreement that the roadway should be  improved and that the Palisadoes should be protected.  Few  are, however, confident that agencies like NEPA are able to  carry out their legislative mandates because of sometimes  conflicting legislation. The Palisadoes Port Royal Protected Area is managed by NEPA,  a role many see as contradictory to the agency's  responsibility of overseeing development approvals.  In its  defence, NEPA's CEO Peter Knight explained that it is the  boards of the Town and Country Planning Authority and the  Natural Resources Conservation Authority for which it  carries out regulatory functions that approves development  and environmental applications.  The Palisadoes peninsula is described as a 'relatively  unique portion of the Jamaican environment'.  Classified as a  semi-desert, it is made up of several tiny islets, which up  to the start of the 20th century were separated by water.  It  is these passageways, scientists say, that allow water to  flood the roadway during the strongest storms and which must  be maintained to preserve the narrow strip of land.  Knight is confident in the mechanisms his agency has  instituted to monitor the construction and protect the  environment.  He told journalists at a press conference on  Oct.  1 that his agency is satisfied that the construction  work would not significantly affect the harbour's plant and  animal life. 'It is not true that there will be destruction of endemic  plants, and it is not true the issue of turtle nesting. . .   because the area is not a turtle nesting site,' the island's  chief town planner said.  He noted that existing plants  including mangroves would be removed and replanted when  construction was completed.  But even as discussions continued, the bulldozers rolled and  despite assurances, few are confident that NEPA will be able  to hold its own against a government bent on development -  in the words of one activist, 'at whatever cost'.  