A major change in the direction of economic development is  essential to avoid the catastrophic unraveling of Earth's  ecosystems that support all life, a new global analysis  published in the journal Science revealed Tuesday. Climate change, pollution, deforestation and other forms of  land use change are pushing species into extinction,  reducing their abundance and home ranges. 'Human societies and infrastructures have evolved with and  rely on particular sets of species and ecosystems and now  these are being reshuffled,' said Paul Leadley of the  University Paris-Sud in France who led the study. 'Even optimistic scenarios for this century consistently  predict extinctions and shrinking populations of many  species,' Leadley told IPS by telephone from France. The goal of halting the loss of biodiversity by 2020 is  under intense negotiation this week in Nagoya at the 10th  Conference of the Parties to the Convention on Biological  Diversity.  However, based on five recent global  environmental assessments, Leadley says that ending  biodiversity loss by 2020 is sadly 'unrealistic'. Leadley and colleague Henrique Miguel Pereira led a 23- member scientific team from nine countries that compared  results of recent global environmental assessments and a  wide range of peer-reviewed literature examining likely  future changes in biodiversity.  The analysis found  inevitable continuing decline of biodiversity during the  21st century, but offers new hope that it could be slowed if  emerging policy choices are pursued. 'Biodiversity' is the term used to describe the wide variety  of living things - trees, insects, plants, animals - that  comprise the planet's biological infrastructure and provide  us with health, wealth, food, water, fuel and other vital  services.  Many people fail to understand how dependent  humanity is on the many natural services provided by nature  and how fast this is changing, Leadley says. Although there has been a public focus on extinctions, it is  changes in species distribution and population sizes that  are more critical to human well-being and better short-term  indicators of the pressures of humans on ecosystems, the  study says. In the oceans, a combination of climate change resulting  from carbon emissions from burning fossil fuels and  overfishing are quickly shifting marine life to the point  where there will be few large fish left to catch,  researchers found.  Jellyfish may be the main seafood item on  the menu in future, he said. On land deforestation, conversion of natural landscapes and  climate change are transforming landscapes.  A recent  million-dollar assessment of the Amazon forest discovered  that if global temperatures rise two degrees C. , as seems  likely, the combination of deforestation of roughly 20  percent of the original forest and forest fires will  undermine the Amazon's unique ability to produce half of its  own rainfall.  Without that rainfall, the rainforest will  convert into dry grasslands (cerrado), resulting in massive  release of carbon and the loss of many species. That's a solid finding, and even if deforestation stops  after 20 or 22 percent is gone, the study shows most of the  Amazon will be inevitably lost in 50 to 60 years, says  tropical biologist Thomas Lovejoy, chief biodiversity  adviser to the president of the World Bank and member of the  Global Environment Facility science advisory panel. 'Two degrees of warming will be hard on many ecosystems.   Tropical forests will be in trouble, there will be few coral  reefs left and temperate forests will be very different then  they are today,' Lovejoy told IPS in Nagoya. A solution to cool the planet and save the Amazon is to  restore forests and grasslands so they remove carbon from  the atmosphere, he said.  Economic growth has to shift  profiting from land conversion to profiting from  restoration. Tackling climate change can be a game changer for the  decline in biodiversity, agrees Leadley.  Scenarios show that  if a price were put on all forms of carbon, including carbon  emitted from deforestation and agriculture, it could go a  long way to fixing the problem, he says.  Deforestation and  agriculture account for 35 to 50 percent of all carbon  emissions into the atmosphere.  They are also the biggest  direct drivers of biodiversity in terms of conversion of  natural ecosystems. A strong carbon tax that both levies a cost for carbon  emissions and rewards carbon sequestration, combined with  effective protected areas, is what will be needed, Leadley  said.  Simply protecting 20 percent of the land and 15  percent of the sea as originally proposed as the  international 2020 objective by the CBD would not be enough  to halt biodiversity loss based on the analysis without  action on climate change. But action must be taken quickly, as the study indicates the  window of opportunity is closing rapidly.  Differences in  policy action taken now could either lead to an increase in  global forest cover of about 15 percent in the best case or  losses of more than 10 percent in the worst case by 2030. Getting policy makers to understand these realities remains  a major challenge.  Scientists hope the creation of an  Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC)-like  mechanism for biodiversity called the Intergovernmental  Platform on Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services (IPBES) will  make the difference. 'The issues are so urgent and the stakes for humanity so  important, scientists need to coalesce through the IPBES to  inform policy-makers with a unified, authoritative voice,'  stated Pereira, of the Universidade de Lisboa, Portugal. Governments here in Nagoya say they are in favour of the  creation of IPBES but some are withholding full support as a  bargaining chip in the highly contentious debates over  Access and Benefit Sharing.  While 'the nature panel', as  it's called in the hallways, would have to be formally  approved at some future meeting at the U. N.  General  Assembly, strong endorsement here at COP 10 is considered a  necessity to make that happen. Global biodiversity assessments are extremely hard to do at  present and we cannot speak with one voice without an  organisation like IPBES, Leadley said. 'I'd like to remind delegates in Nagoya that business-as- usual development pathways will lead to catastrophic  biodiversity loss,' he said. 