Though close to a billion people remain undernourished  worldwide, one in three U. S.  children are overweight — a  problem that First Lady Michelle Obama has made her priority  over the first two years of her husband's administration. This rate of overweight or obese U. S.  children has tripled  in the past 30 years and is now becoming a broader problem  for wealthy countries more generally, officials say. Health and obesity issues, says Sam Kass, assistant chef at  the White House and senior policy adviser for the Obama's  Healthy Food Initiatives, are now an international  challenge. 'It's not just a challenge for the United States, although  we've been dealing with it for quite some time.  But you see  rates going up all over the world and that's going to be an  increasing challenge that we're going to have to come  together to work on — to try to make sure that all of the  world's citizens are getting the food that they need to  nourish themselves,' he told a group of reporters Tuesday. Obesity in children can lead to emotional as well as  dangerous physical conditions including diabetes, heart  disease, high blood pressure or even cancer.  And, for  someone used to the amenities of modern life, obesity can  have multiple causes — lack of exercise, too many high-sugar  or high-salt snacks, unhealthy school lunches, etc. With that in mind, Obama's approach has been to take on the  problem from multiple angles. In February, her office launched a campaign called Let's  Move to facilitate partnerships between U. S.  states,  business and non-profit organisations toward the goal of  solving the challenge of childhood obesity within a  generation. What does that mean exactly? Twenty years from now, says  Robin Schepper, executive director of Let's Move, they hope  to have the childhood obesity rate in the U. S.  down from its  current level of 30 percent of kids to five percent — the  level it was at in 1972. Reaching that goal will require a multipronged approach. Schepper says that when she was growing up in New York City  in the 1960s and 1970s, 70 percent of kids walked or  bicycled to school, while 30 percent rode in cars.  'It is  the reverse now, so we can't just say it's the food…You can  have the best food, eating fruits and vegetables at every  meal, but if you don't have sidewalks in your neighbourhood  and you're not being active, that's a problem. ''The realisation we came to very early on was there is no  magic bullet.  There is no one thing we can do to solve this  problem.  This is the culmination of a lot of issues in  modern society,' says Kass.  'If we're missing major pieces  of a kid's life — the breakfast they eat or if they're not  getting physical activity in schools or when they get home —  we're not going to solve this problem. 'To that end, education, urban planning and a wealth of other  considerations in addition to health — Schepper says 13  different federal agencies worked on a past report on the  childhood obesity issue — come into play when figuring out  how to combat the problem. The most visible action the first lady has taken was in the  early days of Obama administration, when she planted an  vegetable garden on the White House grounds which has been  credited for increasing the U. S.  public's interest in  growing their own fruits and vegetables and has been used as  a way to raise awareness of the importance of eating  healthy. The fall harvest of that garden took place just last week  and yielded about 400 pounds of food.  Kass says that the  1,500-square-foot garden has produced about 2,000 pounds of  produce in its one and a half years — 'a lot for a small  garden', he says. A portion of the produce is used in the White House kitchen,  while the rest is donated to help feed the homeless in  Washington. In addition to these programmes, the White House has called  for 400 million dollars to be invested in expanding access  to fresh, healthy food in underserved, traditionally poor  neighbourhoods — sometimes called 'food deserts', where  convenience stores and fast food restaurants are often the  only food options nearby. Another initiative — reauthorisation of the Child Nutrition  Act, which would provide funding for school meals programmes  — has yet to be approved by Congress, though might be  following next week's U. S.  elections. But some critics see the White House's efforts as more  symbolic than anything else.  Ultimately, they feel, the  initiatives lack the amount of money that will be needed in  order to do things like make school lunches healthier.  Some  also want more fundamental changes to a U. S.  food system  that often makes unhealthy foods easier to obtain, through  measures like subsidies for the production of corn syrup and  other products. 'Only being nine months into it,' says Kass, 'I think we've  made substantial progress, but we obviously have a long way  to go. '