One-fifth of all birds, fish and animals are threatened with  extinction - as many as six million unique and irreplaceable  forms of life — an authoritative new assessment warned  Wednesday. Deforestation, agricultural expansion, overfishing, invasive  alien species and climate change are the specific causes,  but the main engine of destruction is an economic system  that is blind to the reality that there is no economy or  human well-being without nature, experts here say. 'Without global conservation efforts the situation would be  massively worse,' noted Simon Stuart, chair of the  International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN)  Species Survival Commission, which launched the study at the  10th Conference of the Parties to the Convention on  Biological Diversity (CBD) in Nagoya, Japan. Published in the peer-reviewed journal Science, it is the  most comprehensive assessment ever done of the world's  vertebrates - mammals, birds, amphibians, reptiles and  fishes - Stuart said.  Every year, 52 species of mammals, birds and amphibians move  one step down a three-step path to extinction, according to  the study, which utilised data for 25,000 species from the  IUCN Red List of Threatened Species. Southeast Asia has experienced the most dramatic recent  losses, largely driven by the planting of export crops like  oil palm, commercial hardwood timber operations,  agricultural conversion to rice paddies and unsustainable  hunting, the study found.  Parts of Central America, the  tropical Andes of South America, and even Australia have  also all experienced marked losses, in particular due to the  impact of the deadly chytrid fungus on amphibians.  'The backbone of biodiversity is being eroded,' said the  eminent U. S.  ecologist and writer Edward O.  Wilson of  Harvard University.  'One small step up the Red List is one giant leap forward  towards extinction.  This is just a small window on the  global losses currently taking place,' Wilson said in a  statement. The term biodiversity and role of species is not well  understood by the general public or policy makers.   Biological diversity, better known as 'nature', refers to  the plants, animals and microorganisms and their ecosystems  that provide humanity with food, medicines, fresh air and  water, shelter, and a clean and healthy environment in which  to live. 'Nature's backbone is indeed at risk,' said Julia Marton- Lefèvre, IUCN director general, who noted in a press  conference here that one-third of all species are at risk of  extinction.  Another assessment of species, the Global  Biodiversity Outlook 3, released last May found that one- quarter of plant species are threatened, the world's corals  and amphibians are in sharp decline, and the overall  abundance of vertebrates had fallen by one-third in the past  30 years.  Despite this overwhelming evidence, most delegates here at  what is in essence a 'save nature to save ourselves'  international negotiation are playing politics and have been  unable to agree to specific targets.  Last May, CBD science  and policy advisors negotiated targets in Nairobi to protect  20 percent of the land and oceans by 2020.  And that 20  percent target is less than what many experts had advocated.  New targets aiming to halt the loss of species mean nothing  unless states address the cost and practicalities of  reaching targets, say IUCN representatives.  They have called  for a massive increase in funding from the current three  billion dollars a year to 300 billion dollars in annual  public and private financing for biodiversity conservation.   Not surprisingly, new financing is another major hurdle to  overcome by Friday when negotiations conclude.  Representatives from the European Parliament told IPS that a  substantial funding increase from Europe was highly unlikely  beyond the one billion euros for biodiversity the European  Union promised at the U. N.  General Assembly in New York City  in September.  'We are cutting budgets back home, it would be difficult to  offer additional new money here,' said Jo Leinen, head of  the European Parliament delegation and chair of the EP  Committee on Environment.  Leinen, who also chaired one of the GLOBE (Global  Legislators Organisation for a Balanced Environment)  sessions on forests in Nagoya, told IPS that his group was  urging the European Union to make long-term commitments on  financing so funds will be available annually through the  next decade. More than 100 ministers of the environment arrived  Wednesday, but that is not necessarily reason for hope.  If  conversations in the hallways here are any gauge, most  ministers understand little about the role biodiversity  plays in their countries' social and economic well-being.   And environment ministers are generally well below finance  ministers in government hierarchies, limiting their  influence.  Even the World Bank acknowledged this reality, when World  Bank Group President Robert Zoellick addressed the opening  of the ministerial segment of the conference Wednesday  morning in Nagoya. 'Biodiversity is not an add-on.  Preserving ecosystems and  saving species are not luxuries for the rich.  Conservation  and development can go hand in hand.  Our habitat and our  planet deserve nothing less,' Zoellick told delegates. The World Bank will refocus its efforts on the 'financing of  ecosystem and biodiversity services', he said.  More  importantly, the Bank wants government ministries concerned  with economic growth, infrastructure and overcoming poverty  to be the champions of biodiversity conservation.  To make this happen, the Bank is launching a new global  partnership Thursday to help governments integrate the true  value of biodiversity and ecosystem services into their  development planning and accounting systems.  'Conservation does work,' stressed IUCN's Stuart, noting  that in recent years some 64 species like the white rhino  have been assisted in stepping back from the brink of  extinction. The study in Science showed definitively that declines would  have been significantly worse without action.  The  conservation challenge is to protect species and ecosystems  while protecting and/or enhancing the livelihoods of local  people, he acknowledged. 