Past U. S.  inmates and prison staff in electronic waste  recycling programmes face serious health risks after officials  willfully violated health, safety and environmental laws, a  new report has found. An investigation by the Justice Department's Office of the  Inspector General (OIG) shows that e-waste health hazards  were known, but concealed by prison industry officials.  In  one instance, officials disabled a factory's fire alarm  system for three years so that it would not be set off by  clouds of toxic dust. Inmates faced the greatest health risk from breaking the  glass of cathode ray tubes, which contain between two and  five pounds of lead each. 'I think the report on prison e-waste validates what the  prison worker and NGOs have been saying for many years —  that there is a very serious problem with prison e-waste  operations, particularly with worker and inmate exposures to  toxic chemicals,' Barbara Kyle, national coordinator for the  Electronics TakeBack Coalition, told IPS. Federal Prison Industries (FPI), a government corporation  known by its trade name UNICOR, started the recycling of  computers, monitors, printers and other electronics in  federal prisons in 1997.  In 2001, Leroy Smith, a former California prison safety  manager, began raising alarms about the effects of the metal  dust on individuals.  But even after UNICOR's Recycling Business Group was made  aware of the poor conditions, the corporation was slow to  make improvements, failing to answer promptly safety  requests that interfered with business priorities, the  report says. The OIG launched an investigation into the programme in 2006  at the request of Public Employees for Environmental  Responsibility (PEER) and others.  It uncovered a culture at  UNICOR 'that did not sufficiently value worker safety and  environmental protection'. 'In the long tradition of prison labour, these operations  employed inmates with hammers but instead of rocks they were  breaking computer components with no containment or  protective equipment,' said PEER Executive Director Jeff  Ruch.  'Coated in toxic dust, prison staff and inmates worked for  years, in many cases trailing heavy metals back to their  homes and cellblocks,' he said. Further investigation by the OIG revealed instances of staff  misconduct and performance failures that endangered staff  and inmates.  Citing evidence of dishonesty, dereliction of  duty, and theft, the report concluded that 11 UNICOR and BOP  employees were deserving of further investigation. The OIG referred the potential criminal conduct to the  Environmental Crimes Section in DOJ's Environmental and  Natural Resource Division in 2007, but no action was  initiated because of 'various evidentiary, legal, and  strategic concerns'. Most of the employees in question have now retired without  sanction, according to PEER. 'It appears that no responsible official will be held to  account for what happened here and this fat report will  simply sit on a shelf,' Ruch said.  'If these violations had  been committed by a private business, people would be going  to prison but here they still run the prisons. 'In light of the recent negative findings, the OIG report  concludes that in 2009, with limited exceptions, UNICOR's e- waste operations reached federal standards. But questions surrounding electronic waste management still  loom large.  Last month, two U. S.  representatives introduced the  Responsible Electronic Recycling Act of 2010, which calls  for an effective ban on exporting e-waste to developing  nations.  The U. S.  exports the majority of its e-waste to places like  China, India, Nigeria and Ghana, where recycling practices  are terribly damaging to human health and the environment. 'We have suspected that e-waste from UNICOR was being  exported, and this was also confirmed by this report,' Kyle  told IPS.  'I don't think the conclusion here is that we  should export more e-waste because of the atrocious  conditions inside prison recycling plants. ''Instead, we think that the Department of Justice should get  out of the e-waste business altogether.  This is a very  toxic, dangerous business, and it's always going to be a  problem to have that kind of business run inside the  prisons, since the oversight needed just seems impossible in  a prison setting. 'She noted that, 'Prisons do not allow unannounced OSHA  [Occupational Health and Safety Administration] inspections,  and the inmates don't have all the same rights as workers as  private sector employers.  Plus, UNICOR's e-waste operations  undermine the private recyclers, who can't compete with a  company that only pays $1. 23 per hour and no insurance or  worker's compensation. 'Despite the new OIG report, U. S.  legislation continues to  dedicate more effort to managing its own waste products.   This latest bill intends to create thousands of U. S.  jobs  and reduce the environmental and human risk of e-waste by  adhering to proper standards. 'Why are we using taxpayer money to undermine jobs in the  recycling industry? And then poisoning those inmates in the  process? It doesn't make sense,' Kyle said.  'We should be  taking steps to promote domestic recycling, and to create  jobs in this sector.  The federal legislation would bring  back many disassembly jobs that we've already shipped  overseas. '