It is safe to say that the candidates running in Florida for  the Nov.  2 congressional elections do not have a campaign stop  planned for Tallevast.  Residents there believe that they have  been abandoned by the government. Most do not even know who their representative is because no  one can remember the last time a representative came to  speak with the community.  Most do not plan to vote because  they don't see the point. For close to four decades, residents of Tallevast in  southwest Florida lived side by side with the American  Beryllium Company, which employed local men and women to  manufacture parts for nuclear weapons.  Each day, workers  inhaled beryllium dust and brought it home on their  clothing. In an award-winning investigative journalism series for the  Miami Herald titled 'Toxic Town', resident Charles Ziegler  says, 'You came home, you brought that mess home. ' Along  with his wife, Ziegler suffers from chronic beryllium  disease, a fatal scarring of the lung tissue.  Adora Nweze, president of the National Association for the  Advancement of Colored People for the state of Florida, says  the Tallevast case is only the tip of the iceberg. 'I can tell you this,' she told IPS.  'This whole state is  covered with stories similar to this town's.  There are  areas, in the Black community in particular, where people  are dying of cancer.  Companies are depositing their copper  and all sorts of metals in their drinking water. ''Public health has been testing,' she continued sceptically,  'but something needs to be done.  This is very, very real. 'Unbeknownst to Tallevast residents, toxic chemicals used in  the plant, including dioxin and TCE, were seeping into the  ground.  By the time local regulators investigated, a  poisonous plume had spread across 200 acres below the small  historically Black town. The plant was sold to defence contractor Lockheed Martin in  1996, and the leakage was discovered as the company prepared  to sell the property in 2000.  The state of Florida and  Manatee County officials were notified but the problem was  hidden from residents.  State officials quietly began  removing soil until a resident questioned their actions.  In  late 2003 information was finally released on the  groundwater contamination. Only then did the truth of this environmental nightmare  begin to come to light. By this time, nearly one person in every household had been  diagnosed with a type of cancer, and many people were dying  very young. State officials later conceded that the 'notification  provisions of our rules were not adequate' and that  residents should not have had to wait three years to hear  about the contamination under their homes.  In 2004, the community filed four lawsuits against the  multinational defence contractor to address their health and  property damages.  The first of these was scheduled to be  heard this month but talks toward an out-of-court settlement  are also underway. 'I'm angry,' says Laura Ward, who with fellow Tallevast  resident Wanda Washington leads a small community  organisation called Family Oriented Community United and  Strong (FOCUS).  'I made baby formula and cooked for my  family with that water for years while people at Lockheed  Martin and at the county regulatory agencies knew how  harmful it was. 'Ward, who has two children who have had 'bouts with cancer,'  says she is also upset because she had to learn about the  contamination herself.  'We've been a community that's been overlooked for so  long,' observed Ward, 'and I think it's felt that if they  continue to overlook us, we might go away. ' Ward's husband, Dr.  Clifford ('Billy') Ward, the town  dentist, traces his family's history on the land back to the  1890s, when the town began as a 'turp camp' where freed  slaves got jobs teasing the sap out of long-leaf 'slash'  pines and boiling it into turpentine for use in the nation's  shipyards and harbours. 'The first thing that went through my mind was, How could  this happen? Why didn't anyone tell us?' asked Cassandra  'Casey' Brice whose grandfather, Thomas Bryant, and his  brother, Eli, founded the Bryant Chapel Christian Methodist  Episcopal Church a few blocks from her home. 'I think about my neighbors next door, my cousin, my  community,' worried Beatrice Ziegler.  'None of us is living  safe.  None of us!''You just feel like you've been robbed of your heritage and  your legacy,'' said lifelong resident Beverly Bradley, whose  hands and feet were attacked by a fungus she fears came from  the plant's soil.  'Tallevast is us.  It's like they are  taking our whole lives away from us. ''Reporter Ronnie Greene of the Miami Herald captured these  voices of Tallevast in the groundbreaking two-part  investigative story and video: 'Toxic Town'.  In August,  Greene, received an award from the Sidney Hillman Foundation  in recognition of his exceptional reporting.  'The Sidney'  recognises outstanding socially conscious journalism. 'Today the village of Tallevast is little more than a giant  environmental testing ground,' Greene wrote.  'More than 200  wells monitor a plume that spread from an initial estimate  of five acres to more than 200. 'Meanwhile, Lockheed Martin said through a representative  that it has no plans to relocate any of the residents,  claiming the source of the chemical leak has been capped. 'While Lockheed Martin did not operate the facility, it  remains responsible for the cleanup associated with the  contamination from the site,' the company states on a  website.  The full remediation process is expected to take 50 years. 'Many things were surprising, but perhaps none more than the  fact that the town had been polluted with a cancer-causing  chemical - but no one told the residents,' said Greene.  'Not  the state, not the county, not industry. ' Their struggles also brought about a change in the state  laws of Florida.  Now state officials must tell residents  within 30 days if any sorts of health hazards are found in  the community. 