In the run-up to the U. S.  elections set to take place Nov.  2,  the amount of money being spent and eccentricities on display  have reached record levels.  This has been particularly obvious  in debates over energy and climate change. The U. S.  will vote on candidates for the U. S.  Senate and  House of Representatives as well as on numerous state  governorships and other issues next week.  With a new court  decision allowing unrestricted — and unprecedented —  spending by corporations and unions in this year's election,  one emerging trend has been the huge amounts of money  flowing from corporate interests — both domestic and foreign  — to candidates who deny climate change or oppose  legislation to combat it. The stakes are high.  The U. S.  failed to pass to pass  legislation to limit its industrial greenhouse gas emissions  prior to the climate conference in Copenhagen last December  and most expect strong legislative action to be months or  years away. Meanwhile, the issue of climate change is being used by  conservative candidates to rally support from right-wing  voters, such as those affiliated with the Tea Party  movement. No Republican running for a Senate seat openly supports  limiting greenhouse gas emissions, as the proposal for a cap  and trade system approved by the U. S.  House but rejected by  the Senate in 2009 would have done.  Many candidates even  actively deny the validity of climate change and the science  behind it. In Virginia, for example, incumbent Congressman Tom  Perriello, a Democrat, has faced a tough battle from his  challenger, Republican Robert Hurt, who has used Perriello's  'yes' vote for the cap and trade bill in the U. S.  House to  woo voters who buy the argument that the bill would have  cost hundreds of thousands of jobs. The issue of climate change action has been used in a  similar way in races around the country. In California, which has the country's toughest emissions  restrictions, the picture is slightly different, since those  very restrictions are themselves on the ballot.  Next Tuesday  voters in California will decide whether or not to overturn  the emissions limits that, if left in place, are expected to  be used as a model for emissions legislation in other states  and even at the national level. The implications of that vote have not been lost on U. S.   corporate interests, which have poured in money from other  states.  Texas-based oil and gas companies Valero and Tesoro  have combined to contribute about 7. 5 million dollars to  getting California's climate change law suspended. With the stakes even higher for the many nascent but fast- growing clean energy companies in the state, though, this  pro-suspension spending has been dwarfed by campaign money  spent in support of it by about a three to one margin. Overall, this year's election season — called a midterm  election since there is no presidential campaign — have far  outstripped previous midterm elections in the amount of  money raised and spent.  The Center for Responsive Politics  (CRP), which tracks these figures on its website  OpenSecrets. org, predicts the current election's campaigns  will end up costing 3. 7 billion dollars or more, surpassing  2006's then-record spending by about a billion dollars. The fundraising and spending figures are fairly close  between Democrats and Republicans, CRP notes, but  'identifiably conservative' organisations are spending twice  as much on advertisements and communications than liberal  ones.  These funds largely come from corporations which are  able to avoid public scrutiny for their endorsements through  setting up and funding these organisations' work. 'Tens of millions of dollars of is now coming from  organisations who, by law, need not disclose their donors,'  says CRP's executive director, Sheila Krumholz.  'It's now  more difficult than ever for voters to determine whether the  outside groups flooding their television and radio airwaves  with political messages are doing so for any reason other  than promoting their own, narrow set of special interests. 'Climate change regulation is one area where those groups are  certainly interested in promoting their special interests,  and a recent report by Climate Action Network Europe (CANE)  shows that even foreign companies are interested in the  implications of these domestic elections. The report says some of Europe's top greenhouse gas-emitting  companies — the same ones, it says, that argue additional  emission reductions in Europe must wait for the U. S.  to  limit its emissions — have been funding some of the most  notorious climate deniers in the U. S.  Senate races. Nearly 80 percent of the $306,100 contributed by European  corporations Bayer, BASF, Solvay, Lafarge, BP, GDF-SUEZ,  Arcelor-Mittal and EON has gone to those who oppose U. S.   action on climate change, CANE says, amounting to what it  calls a hijacking of U. S.  elections by foreign corporate  interests and a hypocrisy in that these companies often tout  their green credentials. 'It's disturbing that these European polluters fund anti- climate crusaders in the U. S.  while simultaneously fighting  against strong climate legislation in Europe,' Tomas Wyns,  senior policy officer at CANE, said in releasing the report  Monday. The effect of all this spending is still unclear.  While  California's climate regulations are expected to survive,  Republicans are widely expected to earn a majority of seats  in the U. S.  House — and maybe even in the Senate. If that happens, U. S.  climate legislation — already a  distant hope — becomes more distant still. Citing the still poor economy and hostile political  environment, Eileen Claussen, president of the Pew Center on  Global Climate Change, sees the outcome of the elections as  'likely to make advancing climate policy an even tougher  fight than we experienced over the last two years'. 'I think I speak for most of those working on this issue in  Washington when I say the chances of passing a major climate  bill in the next two years are nearly zero,' Claussen told  an energy and business convention in Tel Aviv last week. 