It's been a steady, even if slow growth for the Slow Food movement around the  world. Founded 22 ago in Italy, the Slow Food movement tackles issues as diverse as  basic survival of farmers, land-grabbing, biodiversity protection, school  lunches and consumer awareness.  Slow Food was created in 1989 by Italian Carlo Petrini as a non-profit eco- gastronomic organisation to counteract fast food and the disappearance of  local food traditions.  In 2004, Slow Food created the Terra Madre global network of small farmers,  cooks, academics, NGOs and consumers, meant to connect people around the  world interested in implementing the Slow Food concept: producing quality,  natural food to be commercialised at prices fair to the farmers.  The network  now boasts over 100,000 members in 153 countries.  More than 5,000 participants attended this year's Terra Madre reunion Oct.   21-25 in Torino, Italy.  More than 150,000 people visited Salone del Gusto, a  producers' market taking place by the side of the reunion.  The majority of farmers exhibiting were Italian, testifying to the popularity of  Slow Food in its country of birth.  Out of Slow Food's 1,300 convivia (local  chapters of Slow Food), 291 are in Italy.  But over the last decade, the movement has acquired increased popularity  worldwide.  In Western Europe, where food production has been shaped for decades by  the European Union's Common Agricultural Policy with its focus on industrial  agriculture, an increasing number of middle class consumers are now seeking  alternatives. Since its founding in 2005, Slow Food UK has opened more than 40 local  chapters.  Forty-one chapters are active in France and 31 in Spain.  The  convivia organise periodic markets for local producers and events to make  consumers aware of the economic, environmental and health impacts of  choosing between sustainable and industrial food.  Over the past couple of years, Slow Food has grown in former communist  Eastern Europe as well, with the most numerous local chapters in Romania  and Bulgaria.  Here, following the dismantling of state-run collective farms  after 1989, governments have strongly pushed for the aggregation of small  plots of land, to make farming more efficient. Nevertheless, up to three-quarters of farms in countries like Romania and  Bulgaria continue to be subsistence or semi-subsistence ones.  While many of  these farms are likely to exit the food production system, some are  strengthened through Slow Food, and its periodic local markets for farmers.    In the United States, where agriculture is highly concentrated - the biggest  four firms control over 50 percent of the market in sectors as diverse as beef  and pork packing or corn seed and ethanol production - Slow Food has grown  to over 25,000 members and 250 local chapters since its founding in 2000.  Last year, the movement concentrated on improving the quality of school  lunches.  High obesity rates among U. S.  children have been linked to poor  nutrition.  Over 30 million kids in the U. S.  eat subsidised lunches at school,  with authorities allocating less than one dollar per meal. In September 2009, Slow Food mobilised over 20,000 people to participate in  'Eat-Ins' at schools all over the country, serving food from local farms.   Participants asked legislators to allow locally produced fresh food in school  canteens and to improve school food standards.  Slow Food has also developed branches in Latin America, where it works on  safeguarding traditional production techniques of indigenous communities  and fighting biodiversity loss.  In Asia Japan, one of the earliest countries outside Europe to join the  movement, has over 40 local chapters of Slow Food.  India has only two  convivia and China, three.  Each year, new farmer groups join the Terra Madre network.  Most new  participants at this year's meeting (from outside of Europe) were from Africa,  where Slow Food is developing particularly in the central and western parts of  the continent.  Most local chapters are in Kenya (12) and Senegal (8).  One of the new entrants was Gnima Dieng from the Saloum delta, Senegal, a  producer of wild fruit juices.  Traditionally, women living on the Saloum  islands have made a living out of gathering and processing molluscs, but  overfishing by foreign fleets has made it increasingly difficult for them to  continue this trade.  Women have turned to producing juices from local fruit,  such as karkade, ginger, or tamarind, explains Dieng.  'We sell our juices in local markets and we are now working (with Slow Food)  on opening a laboratory to produce the drinks,' she explains.  'Customers will  have more confidence in our products if they are produced in this way. 'Kenyan Liose Chepkinyeny, also new at Terra Madre, is a producer of ash  yogurt from the district of West Pokot.  The yogurt is produced from cow or  goat milk mixed with ash of the native cromwo tree.  'It helps us, women and  children, survive in the period when men are away with the animals,' explains  Chepkinyeny.  'Being here at Terra Madre gives us hope.  It helps us to continue the struggle  to bring added value to our products.  We are making progress, but we still  have miles to go. ' Chepkinyeny said that there are now over 500 members in  the Kenyan network, which is growing.  In addition to fighting for survival, African farmers in the Terra Madre network  are also addressing larger issues of the continent.  Following the 2009 famine  in Uganda, Edward Mukiibi - the Slow Food convivium leader in Mukuno,  central Uganda - has developed a programme to create school gardens where  kids can grow their own vegetables.  This year, over 1,000 students participate  in this project in 31 schools.  At this year's Terra Madre, Slow Food announced its commitment to a global  campaign against land grabbing.  According to the organisation, 50 million  hectares of arable land in Africa, South America, Asia and Eastern Europe have  been or are in the process of being bought or leased by foreign governments  or corporations.  On these lands, monocultures, particularly for biofuels, are  replacing small-scale farming.  'Slow Food is a small entity,' Carlo Petrini said in Torino, 'but this is not a  time for parochialism.  We want to strengthen rapports with all organisations  and movements that work for food sovereignty, that fight against food being  considered a commodity. '  