The world is ill-prepared for the human toll from the expected  increase in floods, droughts and extreme storms and hurricanes  on the horizon. So say experts like Peter Walker, director of the Tufts  University-based Feinstein International Center near Boston.   In late 2008, his organisation authored a report titled  'Humanitarian Costs of Climate Change' for the United  Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs. 'We may be keeping people alive, we may be helping people to  survive,' Walker told IPS.   'But we are not doing it in a  way that helps people recover and be able to face the next  crisis. ' Walker advocates moving away from the current ad hoc nature  of international humanitarian relief efforts. 'We are getting to the point where these crises are  sufficiently frequent and large that you need to shift to  having a much more formal international system that allows  pre-disaster assistance and relief [to be] deployed more  quickly,' he said. Walker said that his comments would apply to all natural  disasters whether or not they are caused by climate change,  including earthquakes and tsunamis. The other complicating factor in countries receiving  humanitarian relief such as Pakistan and Haiti is that  recovery remains difficult and long term in the face of lack  of resources, basic infrastructure, government services, and  economic equality in the population, he said. Although the people of Aceh province in Indonesia managed to  recover from the tsunami of 2004, individual family savings  ended up getting spent in the process of survival, he added. 'Five or six years after the tsunami, if there is another  hit, people will not be in a good situation to recover as  they were last time,' Walker said. Robert Fox, executive director of Oxfam Canada, told IPS  that there is greater recognition among aid agencies and  nongovernmental organisations of the need 'to increase our  capacity' in humanitarian crises, as well as to 'be more  strategic'. With millions of rural people displaced and in internal  refugee camps following the floods in Pakistan, relief  workers were in short supply even with a strong aid agency  presence on the ground, he observed.  'We can do more than  one crisis at a time, but more than one mega crisis at a  time is a stretch,' Fox said. One controversial aspect in relief is the increased role of  foreign militaries.  U. S.  and Canadian soldiers arrived in  Haiti to deliver supplies, beef up communications and  rebuild infrastructure.  In addition, U. S.  military  helicopters were used for rescue and delivery of supplies to  Pakistan's flooded areas in the Indus River basin.  Fox is opposed to aid agencies working closely with the U. S.   military - which is viewed with great suspicion and  resentment, for instance, in Pakistan in light of the U. S.   military's role in that country, including its drone attacks  against suspected Islamist forces. 'When the military do things, they do it in a very expensive  way,' he said.  'They often do it in a slow way because of  the level of preparedness and scale which they do it.  And  this isn't their core competency.  They are not very  sensitive to local leadership, local ways of doing things. 'Fox cited the example following the Haiti earthquake of the  U. S.  military's initial monopolisation of the Port-Au-Prince  airport which served as a temporary hub for incoming  airborne humanitarian relief.  'A number of agencies  [including Doctors without Borders] found it hard to get  things through,' he noted. Nevertheless, the world's major militaries remain the best  source for the combination of helicopters, lift vehicles and  engineering capability needed to sort out the disruption and  chaos following future natural disasters, says Michael  Byers, holder of the Canada Research Chair in Global  Politics and International Law at the University of British  Columbia. The biggest obstacle is the military itself, especially in  Canada, where defence planners are not jumping at the  expanded opportunities in humanitarian relief, even with  their soldiers' battle weariness in war-torn Afghanistan, he  told IPS. 'It is a question of changing the mindset of the Canadian  military leadership that humanitarian missions are going to  be an essential component.  I think humanitarian disaster  relief is going to be the primary role for the Canadian  forces in the coming years, I don't think the military  leadership understands that now,' Byers said. Martin Shadwick, a military analyst at Toronto's York  University, agrees that ambivalence exists in Canada's  military. 'There is not really a negative connotation in the military  towards [disaster relief] I think they would only get  concerned if they were being called upon day in and day out  and were turning into disaster relief 911 [telephone  emergency] service,' he said. Shadwick warns that an insufficient supply of military  equipment and services has developed in the militaries of  the European Union and North America in wake of recent  austerity measures. 'Compared to 10 or 20 years ago, even the Americans'  capabilities to provide disaster relief capabilities, that  is military-based capabilities, has been going down, because  in many ways, defence budgets have been slashed,' he said. Also, it appears that some humanitarian crises receive more  attention in terms of aid assistance than others. Niger, Mali and sub-Saharan Africa in general are  experiencing a significant food crisis following flooding  and then drought.  But they are receiving less attention than  Haiti, for example, in terms of relief even though climate  change has been a major factor, notes Robert Fox.  'Those are slow onset disasters, something we knew was  coming.  The challenge there is that there will be more of  those.  It is difficult to get the world's attention to those  crises, difficult to mobilise donor response to those  crises, and yet they are huge and acute,' he said.  'Hundreds  of thousands of lives hang in the balance. 'Fox suggests that extreme weather events such as hurricanes  receive more international media attention than a shortage  of rain.  'Yet, we know there are more droughts lasting and  they are more widespread, and so you have challenges around  [aid agency] surge capacity.  Challenges as to we need to be  operating in a number of different places at scale at the  same time. 'The good news is that the United Nations' role in relief is  getting better in terms of dividing up responsibilities for  items like food, health and refugees among different U. N.   agencies, says Andrew Mack, who directs the Human Security  Project at Simon Fraser University in Vancouver. Yet, he continued, 'It is a huge problem that the U. N.  has  in any of these missions in trying to get everybody to work  together.  The old herding cats problem. ' Also, humanitarian work tends to be immediate and not long  lasting.  The result is that NGOs are competing with each  other for new government contracts all the time, Mack told  IPS. 'The moment they start on one project, they are already  looking around [for another humanitarian crisis],' he said. 