The international community has finally awoken to the other  great trans-boundary challenge of our time, with a new  international agreement to halt the unravelling of the web of  life that sustains humanity. The new agreement by 193 nations that are part of the U. N.   Convention on Biological Diversity includes a commitment to  reduce the rate of species loss by half by 2020, as well as  the historic Nagoya Protocol on access and benefit sharing  of genetic resources. This awakening only applies to the few early risers.  The  vast majority remain asleep, unaware of our utter dependence  on the living things that are the one and only source of  oxygen, water, food and fuel.  And unaware that nature is our  reality while the economy is simply a complicated game we  created.   Japan imports more than 60 percent of its food and most of  Europe's ecosystems have been trashed, with only 17 percent  in reasonable shape, according to a first-ever assessment.   The only reason those countries haven't collapsed is they  are rich enough to help themselves to nature's ecological  resources and services like food, timber, materials from the  rest of the world. Put a glass lid over Japan, Germany or England and they  wouldn't last long.  'We exploited the biological resources abroad, especially in  the South.  This is why we, the people of Aichi, Nagoya, must  apologise. . . for the deterioration of the ecosystems and  biodiversity we have caused,' says a public appeal by civil  society from Nagoya, the host city of the U. N.  Convention on  Biological Diversity (CBD) for the last two weeks of  October.  The Japanese government wanted no part of this apology, says  Kinhide Mushakoji, one of the organisers and a professor at  the Osaka University of Economics and Law.  The appeal was  signed by 156 organisations in Japan.   While not ready to publicly acknowledge reality, the  Japanese government did push hard to make sure countries  reached an agreement despite the usual North-South divide.   After the big U. N.  meeting in Copenhagen failed to reach a  meaningful agreement to tackle climate change, the other  great trans-boundary challenge, failure in Nagoya would have  deflated hopes for future multilateral agreements to address  common threats. The central conflict is that countries of the North are like  desperate bio-pirates, addicted to plundering the richer  ecosystems of the South for food, raw materials and cheap  labour.  Increasingly, the South is resisting and seeking  redress.  Part of that redress, and the only way to end the  escalating loss of species - an estimated 5,000 to 30,000  extinctions per year - is to transform the growth economy'Japan played a central role in the growth economy.  We need  to move to a subsistence economy,' Mushakoji told IPS.  There was no talk of moving to a local, subsistence economy  in the formal negotiations.  While the causes of species loss  are well known - deforestation, agricultural expansion,  overfishing and climate change - their connection to a  growth economy have only recently been acknowledged.  The  response to that understanding is a push for a green  economy, one that reduces greenhouse gas emissions, extracts  and uses less natural resources, creates less waste and  reduces social disparities. Perversely, the current growth economy has led countries  like Japan and many in Europe to subsidise the destruction  of the global marine fisheries by overfishing, says Achim  Steiner, executive director of the U. N.  Environment  Programme (UNEP), which administers the convention. 'A green economy approach would invest $8 billion of the  estimated $27 billion worth of subsidies in areas such as  Marine Protected Areas and tradable fish quotas,' said  Steiner at the opening of the conference.  UNEP studies have shown that approach would ultimately  result in far higher fish catches in the future, raise the  incomes of local people and ensure more fish protein was  available to nearly one billion of the world's poorest.  Ending such perverse subsidies is one of 20 strategic goals  countries agreed to reach by 2020.  Now collectively known as  the 'Aichi Target', Target 3 is to end to subsidies harmful  to biodiversity.  But there is also an escape clause: '… taking into account national socio-economic conditions'.  If  countries continue to insist that their local economic  interests trump nature's reality, they can continue to  deplete fisheries until there is little but jellyfish for  everyone. Completely stopping the loss of natural habitats - forests,  corals, grasslands and wetlands - by 2020 had been Target 5  going in at the beginning of CBD 10th Convention of the  Parties, but in the end parties agreed Target 5 would be to  at least halve the rate of loss based on a baseline to be  determined by 2012.   'It is necessary to halt the loss of biodiversity by 2020.   This can't be postponed,' said Mario Tanao, a youth delegate  and member of Biodiversity on the Brink, a Japanese youth  organisation.   About 100 young people under the age of 30 were among the  16,000 registrants.  They had no official role but were  allowed to address the main plenary for two or three minutes  to remind official delegates that they would have to live  with the decisions made in Nagoya.  Youth view the world  without the usual political constraints and can unite in a  common cause to end the loss biodiversity, Tanao told IPS.  'Since youth will be the most severely impacted by  biodiversity loss. . .  we have the right to participate in  decision making and to share our perspectives,' she said.  Tanao and others have formed a network called the Global  Youth Biodiversity Organisation, which was officially  recognised by the CBD secretariat at the end of the meeting. 'We hope to have youth from more than 100 countries at the  next COP (Conference of the Parties),' says Christian  Schwarzer, a youth representative of the German Forum on  Environment and Development. 'We are the generation that will live in 2050.  We will make  sure that at the next COP our voice will be heard and we  will stop the loss of biodiversity by 2020 and not later,'  Schwarzer said.  The Dutch government quietly released a scientific analysis  on the second to last day of the COP plainly stating that  halting global biodiversity loss by 2050 would be extremely  difficult if not impossible.  And by 2020, absolutely  impossible, said the head of the study, Maarten Hajer of the  Netherlands Environmental Assessment Agency.  Hajer's study looked at the main drivers of species loss -  agriculture, deforestation, overfishing and climate change -  and options that could be employed from now to 2050 in a  world with nine billion people.  Simply increasing the size  of protected areas to 20 percent of the entire land area was  'grossly insufficient', he said. The only hope was a combination of large protected areas and  shifting to sustainable production and consumption.  Hajer's  'aggressive' scenarios included eating 40 percent less meat  per person in the developed world by 2050, boosting crop  yields 30 percent, limiting climate change to two degrees C  of warming, and making forestry and fisheries sustainable.  'Even then we can only reduce the rate of biodiversity loss  but not stop it, according to the models,' Hajer told IPS. This analysis offers the first quantitative insight into the  scope of the challenge in reducing biodiversity loss, even  under a green economic approach.  'The Green Economy is only a solution for those who play in  the monetary economy.  Billions of people don't,' said  Mushakoji.  The city of Nagoya is between the cities of Tokyo and Kyoto,  he said.  'If you want to go to Tokyo, you can't just slow  down the train going to Kyoto.  You have to change trains. '