Gulf coast fishers, conservationists, seafood distributors and  oil workers rallied here at Louisiana's capital over the  weekend to demand that oil giant BP be held accountable for  the 'ongoing' use of toxic dispersants in the Gulf of Mexico. 'We don't have the open sores and blisters caused by BP's  toxic dispersants that the people in Plaquemine's Parish  have,' Karen Hopkins from Grand Isle, Louisiana told IPS.   'We are being poisoned by BP's same dispersants, but our  symptoms are more lethargy and depression symptoms caused by  chemical poisoning. 'Hopkins, who works for Dean Blanchard Seafood, a large and  well-known seafood distributor, was a member of the Oct.  30  Rally for Gulf Change, whose organisers said they were  working towards 'preserving our God-given rights to clean  air and water for future generations. ' Drew Landry, who describes himself as 'a songwriter who  works for a commercial craw-fisherman', told IPS that he  first grew concerned about BP's mishandling of the oil  disaster, which began on Apr.  20 when the Deepwater Horizon  rig exploded in the Gulf of Mexico, by what he saw the oil  giant do the following day. 'I played a concert in New Orleans on Apr.  20, and the next  morning went to take one of the classes on how to clean  oil,' Landry told IPS.  'I realised it was not about cleaning  oil, but rather BP's effort to get a roster of names of  commercial fishermen from whom they'd have to defend  themselves against in the future. ' The organisers and speakers at the rally that was held on  the steps of the state capitol building on a sunny Saturday  were most concerned with BP's massive use of toxic  dispersants to sink the oil.  The dispersants were also  injected at the wellhead to keep most of the oil from  reaching the surface.  BP used Corexit 9500 and Corexit 9527, both of which are  banned in Britain and at least 19 other countries.  Chemicals  released from the combination of crude oil and dispersants  can cause health problems that include central nervous  system depression, respiratory problems, neurotoxic effects,  genetic mutations, leukemia, birth defects, cardiac  arrhythmia, and cardiovascular damage, among many others. 'I've had lung problems, auto-immune problems, nausea,  headaches, and bronchitis because of BP's disaster,' Beverly  Armand from Grand Isle told IPS.  'When I leave the area it  clears up, and when I go back, I get sick again. 'Armand said her doctor has placed her on three different  antibiotics, none of which has been very effective, and had  her blood tested for hydrocarbons.  'My creatine level is high, and they found creosote in my  blood,' she explained.  'And we still have fresh oil coming  in, and BP is still spraying Corexit.  The stuff they are  calling algae is foam caused by the dispersants. 'Protesters held signs that read 'Hell No It's Not Over',  'Ban Corexit Now', and a drawing of a pelican with the words  'I want my life back' - the last also a reference to  comments by the former chief executive of BP, Tony Hayward,  which were widely deemed insensitive to struggling Gulf  residents. Organisers told IPS that several people were unable to  attend the rally because the interstate 10 highway from  Lafayette was closed due to a chemical spill. Susan Price, a small business owner from Chauvin, Louisiana,  told IPS that she has been suffering from health problems  since she was exposed in August to chemicals she believes  are from the oil disaster. 'I'm worried for my grandchildren,' Price said at the rally.   'The seafood is woefully under-tested for toxins, while the  government and BP are patting themselves on the back for a  job well done.  We will not be lulled, be silenced, or stand  down.  We will fight to protect our people and our land. 'James Miller, a commercial fisherman from Mississippi, told  onlookers that he found oil and dispersants in the water  while fishing recently. 'I've had diarrhea, vomiting, the sweats, and been  hospitalised for three days,' said Miller, who worked 73  days for BP as an oil spill responder.  'I've seen the dead  turtles, dead birds, dead dolphins and dead fish, and I've  taken people out on my boat to show them the oil.  It's still  there, and I can tell you the seafood is not safe to eat. 'Later that afternoon, the group convened a meeting at the  Manship Theatre in downtown Baton Rouge. Rob Coulan, a businessman from Harvey, Louisiana, spoke of  neuro-toxic side effects of the dispersants that have been  well documented since at least 1987.  'BP knew what this  stuff would do long before they ever used it in the Gulf,'  he said. 'BP used a world record amount of dispersants in our Gulf,'  Marylee Orr, the executive director of Louisiana  Environmental Action Network, said.  'And we are doing  petroleum hydrocarbon tests on soils, waters, and seafood  and finding extremely high levels. ''We still have oil, and all the problems associated with  it,' Orr added.  'And all the fishermen in this room will  tell you that they [BP] are still using Corexit.  The dead  and dying birds and wildlife are merely a reflection of what  is happening to us. 'Cherri Foytlin, whose husband works in the Gulf oil  industry, announced that every Louisiana state  representative and senator had been invited to both events.   While she said that two had responded to her invitation by  agreeing to meet with them, no one showed up at either  event. 'In five to 10 years from now, people all along the Gulf  Coast are going to be dropping dead from cancer, and that  includes children,' Foytlin said, before directing her next  comments towards BP.  'I'm not your experiment.  This is my  life.  Our Gulf is not your experiment. '