A series of bilateral free trade agreements (FTAs) is threatening the livelihoods of  India's fishermen on the 8,000 km peninsular coastline - among the longest in  the world - and the diets of millions of Indians for whom fish is a cheap source  of protein. On Oct.  25 Indian Prime Minister Manmohan Singh and his Japanese  counterpart Naota Kan announced in Tokyo the completion of negotiations  for a Comprehensive Economic Partnership Agreement (CEPA), covering trade  in goods and services, investment, movement of workers, intellectual property  and bilateral cooperation.   When the CEPA is signed it is expected to impact fishermen in the same way  as the Indo- Thailand FTA which did away with tariffs for fish imports from  January 2007.  According to Lal Koyiparambil, president of the Kerala Independent  Fishworkers Federation, the Indo-Thai FTA resulted in a sharp drop in fish  prices as importers flooded the market with Thai marine harvests.   ''Consumers were happy with the drop in prices but complained that the  imports were not fresh and that fish species that people were accustomed to,  such as oily sardine and mackerel, disappeared from local markets,'' Lal told  IPS. Kerala, which accounts for 20 percent of landings and is the most important  of India's nine coastal states as producer, consumer and exporter of marine  products, was the state affected most by the Indo-Thai FTA.   ''This year saw a jump in sardine exports from Kerala thanks to depletion of  Southeast Asian stocks, but this benefited the big export firms rather than  artisanal fishers or small trawler operators,'' Lal said.  ''And then this is likely to  be a temporary phenomenon. ''Secretary of the powerful National Fishworkers Forum (NFF) T.  Peter, said the  Indo-Japan CEPA poses a further threat since it may allow Japanese fishing  fleets to bypass current restrictions on foreign operators that require them to  give majority stakes to Indian collaborators in mandatory joint ventures.   ''Japanese industrial fishing vessels are far better equipped than Indian craft  and have sophisticated sonar and satellite-based equipment for detecting  shoals and have a reputation for not respecting sustainable fishing practices,''  Peter said. Going by coast guard seizures India's Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ) is a  happy hunting ground for poachers from countries like Taiwan using  industrial vessels capable of electronically tracking down and rapidly freezing  catches of highly-prized species like the yellow fin tuna to meet the  standards of buyers in Japan, the European Union and the United States. According to figures available with India's Marine Products Export  Development Authority (MPEDA) close to 30 million dollars worth of yellow fin  tuna was exported from India's EEZ in 2007 and another 50 million dollars  worth in 2008.   However, a drop to 30 million dollars worth of tuna catches in 2009 led to  suspicions of increased poaching activity - though other factors such as  overfishing of this migratory fish may be responsible.  India's total marine  exports in 2009 exceeded 2 billion dollars. ''Owners of small trawlers have taken to selling their catch mid-sea to foreign  industrial vessels at throwaway prices, and red meat tuna end up as sashimi  on dinner plates in Europe, China, Japan and the U. S. ,'' said Lal.  ''This practice  is short-changing the country of valuable foreign exchange while denying  Indian consumers access to a popular, protein-rich variety of fish caught  along their own coasts. ''Lal blames the situation on unhelpful central government policies that are  geared around economic liberalisation and ignore the plight of artisanal  fishermen or small trawler owners.  ''Just look at the draft Marine Fisheries  Regulation and Management Bill (MFRMB). ''The MFRMB has triggered protests from affected state governments that  complain that they were not consulted and agitations by the NFF which, in a  formal statement dated Jan.  14, 2010, criticised the bill for failing to define or  even mention the word 'fishermen'.  ''If passed in the present form the MFRMB will only empower centralised  bureaucracy, while negatively impacting the fisher people and adversely  affecting any genuine protection of sea,'' the NFF said.   ''The draft Bill does not  satisfy the aspirations of the India's 1. 1 million marine fishermen and a  community of 3. 5 million coastal people. ''The MFRMB contradicts the recommendations of a central government  committee in 1997 that opposed  foreign vessels fishing in Indian waters -   but that was before a slew of FTAs were signed with maritime countries such  as Thailand, South Korea, Singapore and now Japan. ''It appears that the MFRMB is aimed at opening up Indian waters to foreign  fishing while requiring traditional fishermen to obtain licences from the  central government to venture beyond 12 nautical miles,'' said NFF's Peter. One of the main drivers of the MFRMB, K. V.  Thomas, who is union minister of  state for agriculture, defends the bill as necessary for ''maximising export- oriented fisheries and regulating fishing by foreign trawlers in the EEZ. ''The MFRMB deals with the EEZ which covers two million square kilometres on   the Arabian Sea, Indian Ocean and Bay of Bengal while the jurisdiction of the  coastal states of Gujarat, Maharashtra, Karnataka, Goa, Kerala, Tamil Nadu,  Andhra Pradesh, Orissa and West Bengal is limited to 12 nautical miles of  coastal sea.   ''It is unfair to ask impoverished coastal people to seek central government  licenses in distant New Delhi,'' said Lal.  ''Such factors as corruption in  granting licences and most coastal people not understanding English or Hindi  (spoken in landlocked northern and central India) need to be taken into  account. ''  The NFF campaigned for decades against foreign vessels fishing in Indian  waters, with or without licences, and demanded legislation to protect the  rights of local fishermen.  ''Now that there is finally a draft bill (MFRMB) we find  that it discourages locals from entering the deeper part of the EEZ, where  stocks of tuna exist.  ''On the other hand the MFRMB talks about providing docking facilities for  foreign fishing vessels,'' Peter said. The NFF gained international prominence at the Food and Agriculture  Organisation's 1984 World Fisheries Conference in Rome where it successfully  led a parallel meeting for artisanal fishermen from 34 countries.   