As national policies are developed to implement REDD, the U. N.   effort to reduce greenhouse gas emissions from deforestation  and forest degradation, a key question has been how to ensure  social and environmental standards are upheld in REDD  projects, both at the national and international level. In some places, most notably Indonesia, it is far from clear  that those policies, called safeguards, will be adopted. After the REDD mechanism, which allows wealthy countries to  offset their emissions by paying poorer countries to not cut  down some of their forests, was agreed at 2007's U. N. -led  climate change meetings in Bali, several initiatives were  created to deliver the funding that would be provided by  donor countries to the beneficiaries in REDD countries.   Those included the U. N. -REDD Programme and the World Bank's  Forest Carbon Partnership Facility (FCPF) and Forest  Investment Programme (FIP). The governing bodies of those three initiatives will meet in  Washington starting this weekend to discuss ways to  streamline support for national REDD strategies.  Already  this week, some meetings, such as those between participants  and observers in the FCPF, have been taking place. At those meetings, a hot topic has been the World Bank's  proposal to allow other multilateral institutions to become  delivery partners in its work funneling REDD funds to  developing countries. This proposal would further complicate an already messy web  of institutions acting as intermediaries between those  paying for and those fulfilling the forest conservation  mandated by REDD.  NGOs representatives seem okay with the  idea, however — as long as it does not deepen the many  potential problems already facing REDD programmes. The primary way to do that is to include in the policies  safeguards that guarantee certain social and environmental  standards are adhered to. Currently, the World Bank has a fairly robust safeguards  policy, which some NGO leaders who attended the FCPF  meetings this week fear might not be replicated by other  institutions that could become part of the partnership's  work.  'If you're going to allow other partners in the FCPF then we  want standards that are going to be at least as strong for  them too,' says the Bank Information Center's (BIC) director  of campaigns, Mark Rentschler. If not, says Susanne Breitkopf, forest policy advisor at  Greenpeace, the proposal could lead to a 'race to the  bottom' where a REDD country would be tempted to choose the  agency with the lowest safeguard standards as their delivery  partner for REDD funding. Rentschler says it is very rare for countries, especially  REDD countries, to have safeguards as strong as the World  Bank's and that implementing such standards is a real  challenge for such countries — though something that has to  be done because some of the activities set to take place  under REDD could be harmful to communities and even to the  environment. This has particularly been the case in Indonesia, where in  the past the government has evicted indigenous or other  communities from forest areas set aside for conservation or  given to mining or plantation interests.  As has happened in  other countries in Asia, Latin America and Africa,  traditional lands belonging to communities in or near forest  areas have been allocated to other interests without prior  consultation with the communities that have sustainably  managed those forests throughout their history. One reason for this violation of rights is the lack of  safeguards protecting them in the national legal codes, a  problem that needs to be addressed as countries continue to  draw up their national REDD policies, says a study released  in Washington Wednesday by a coalition of Indonesian civil  society and indigenous groups. The study cites both moral and legal arguments for why  rights-based safeguards should be required in an Indonesian  policy.  'Since REDD aims to save humankind, it should make  people in and around forests a priority,' it says, before  discussing obligations under the U. N. 's Declaration of  Indigenous Rights and other international and national laws. Indonesia, which is receiving nearly three billion dollars  for REDD demonstration projects and preparations, released a  draft strategy for implementing REDD in September, but that  draft has been criticised for not going far enough to  address governance issues and safeguards. 'As this money is flowing to the government, the problem is  the lack of necessary mechanisms to design, manage and  disclose the money that is flowing in,' says Jelson Garcia,  who coordinates BIC's work in Southeast Asia from Manila. 'Indonesia plays a very important role when it comes to  climate change mitigation, particularly with reference to  the role of forests, and what happens in Indonesia in terms  of REDD planning actually applies to all other countries  that have REDD projects,' he says. In recent years, Indonesia has emerged as the number three  emitter of greenhouse gases, largely due to deforestation  and peatlands degradation there.  Globally, nearly 20 percent  of human-related greenhouse gas emissions come from  deforestation.  Starting this January, a two-year moratorium on forest  clearing in Indonesia will halt the spread of paper and palm  oil plantations in the country in exchange for a $1 billion  grant from Norway. Citing this moratorium, Brietkopf sees Indonesia as 'at a  very important moment right now'. But given what she calls its long history of a lack of  respect for the rights of indigenous communities, safeguards  that ensure rights are protected and natural forests are  protected — rather than the practice of clearing forests to  replace them with trees used for palm oil production — will  be the 'pillar of success' for REDD. 'Without these safeguards in place REDD can easily lead to a  very bad outcome,' Breitkopf says, which could end up  hurting the people who have cared for the forests for so  long or even encouraging deforestation — the exact opposite  of what the mechanism is intended to do. She says there is already broad consensus at the  international level on the need for safeguards that ensure  REDD does what it is intended to, but that they need to be  adopted at the national level. She and others stress the importance of those safeguards  being standard across different countries and institutions,  an issue that will be discussed throughout the week here. 'Right now, all the REDD decision makers are in Washington  trying to formulate and discuss policies with regards to  safeguards, governance, etc,' says Garcia.  'We do not want  REDD to complicate or worsen the forest conflicts that  already exist. '