For much of late October, Caribbean ministers of agriculture,  journalists, farmers and academics gathered in this tiny but  picturesque south Caribbean island in a rearguard bid to  refocus a region used to existing mostly for tourism on  agriculture, given a mounting food import bill and fears of  yet another global food crisis. Few who attended the plethora of workshops, ministerial  meetings and networking opportunities at the Caribbean Week  of Agriculture expressed any doubts about the urgency of  sounding alarms for a sector that has been treated as a  distant cousin by governments, even though the dollar  contribution of agriculture is as valuable as tourism in  many countries. The hundreds of participants who flew to this island that  the United States invaded in 1983 appear to agree that a  mammoth task lies ahead, on issues ranging from a dire lack  of commercial credit available to farmers and the need to  ensure planters have land leases to leverage bank loans, to  crop theft and organised cartels importing food from North  America. 'We have learnt some valuable lessons from the food, fuel  and financial crises about how vulnerable the Caribbean is  as it regards food imports and production,' said Arlington  Chesney, director of the Trinidad-based Caribbean  Agricultural Research and Development Institute (CARDI). Elaborating on the vulnerability of small island states,  Chesney recalled the chicken meat shortage in some nations  following the Sep.  11, 2001 attacks on New York and  Washington, noting that flights which usually brought  hatching eggs from the southern U. S.  state of Georgia were  grounded like all others as authorities shut down U. S.   airspace for more than a week. Prices quickly shot up as chicken meat became scarce, he  said, noting that the lesson is for the Caribbean to work  towards producing more to feed itself. 'So when we talk about sovereignty, it is about the ability  of the region to produce food for itself,' he said,  announcing a ministerial decision to change policy tack  'from the need to achieve food security to food  sovereignty'. Additionally, the Caribbean is now preparing for a likely  shortage or protracted price hike in wheat flour because of  major crop failure in Russia. This could add to the already alarming collective food tab  of $4 billion a year, half of which comes as ready-to-eat  meals from outside the region that consumers and restaurants  are increasingly favouring. Meanwhile, farmers' groups complained about their inability  to access credit to expand production, improve technology  and plant high-yield crop varieties because commercial banks  regard them as 'high risk' even though they produce  something that every living thing must consume - food. Jethro Greene of the regional farmers' network called for a  rethinking in this area if agriculture is to prosper, while  Melvin Edwards of the Caribbean Confederation of Credit  Unions pointed out that credit unions have largely prospered  while many banks collapsed like ninepins in the 2008 crisis. 'We have learned that bigger is not necessarily better,' he  said, urging farmers to support credit unions, where they  can access low- and sometimes no-interest loans. If accessing bank credit is a problem, crop theft is an even  greater challenge, according to Hilson Baptiste, Antigua's  agriculture and lands minister. He said crop stealing impacts 18 to 25 percent of  agricultural land, and has obvious 'de-motivating effects'  on farmers.  He and CARDI's Chesney said ministers have come  around to the belief that larceny is now part of 'organised  crime'. 'It is pretty organised and now a heavy burden on  agriculture.  We have seen farmers abandon lands because of  the pain and heartache,' he said. The question of the quality of food imported also made the  rounds of ministerial caucuses and professional workshops.   Baptiste said all should be concerned about hormone-laced  meats and vegetables making it onto Caribbean dinner tables. Such imports, he suggested, might well be responsible for  'us seeing 10-year-old boys with breasts.  The same is true  with young girls.  This is all because we are not producing  enough of our own and have to spend so much money importing  food that we can grow ourselves. 'In a sign of how badly agriculture has slipped as a regional  priority, CARDI's Ena Harvey said that the coconut industry  is in such dire straits that 'all of the massage oils used  in the tourism industry (made from coconuts) are now  imported from outside the region. '