While foreign policy issues played almost no role in Tuesday's  election results, the historic Republican landslide will  almost certainly make Barack Obama's vision of a more positive  U. S.  role in international affairs more difficult to pursue. The Republicans, who won control of the House of  Representatives and fell just short of a majority in the  Senate, are for the most part strongly opposed to major  elements of Obama's foreign policy ambitions, particularly  with respect to arms control, climate change, and greater  engagement with multilateral institutions. They also tend to be significantly more hostile toward  countries with which Obama has tried hard to cultivate  better relations, notably Russia and China; as well as  nations, such as Syria, Iran, and Venezuela, with which he  has tried, however timidly, to ease tensions. 'Anyone who wanted to see the U. S.  demonstrate that it could  positively reshape the international order — whether that  meant taking a new direction with Russia or China, or  achieving Israel-Palestinian peace, or rallying other  nations behind efforts to address great global challenges on  climate and nuclear arms control — will find that these  challenges have just become a lot more difficult,' said  Steve Clemons, director of the American Strategy programme  at the New America Foundation (NAF). 'This breed of Republicans has great disdain for  international institutions and treaties and a kind of  pugnacious nationalism that is reflexively hostile to  multilateralism and engagement,' he added. Of course, as president with the power to veto legislation  he dislikes, Obama will still retain the initiative in  dealing with other nations.  '(A)s long as Obama is prepared  to veto bills he dislikes, he will carry the day,' according  to James Lindsay, senior vice president of the Council on  Foreign Relations (CFR).  'Congress has not overridden a  foreign policy veto in a quarter century. 'Moreover, the fact that Democrats will likely retain a slim  four-seat majority in the Senate will mean that House  Republicans will be unable on their own to enact binding  legislation that effectively ties the president's hands  overseas on issues he cares strongly about. But their power to set the House agenda, initiate  legislation, hold hearings, and force officials to testify  before them can put the administration on the defensive, as  well as influence the political atmospherics surrounding  U. S.  relations with other countries.  'Any Congress, particularly a hostile Congress, has the  power to give any sitting president a major national  security migraine, and the incoming House (Republican)  leadership has proven their determination to confront the  Obama Administration's foreign policies,' noted former Amb.   Marc Ginsberg, an adviser to President Bill Clinton, in an  article posted at huffingtonpost. com. Indeed, the pugnacity to which Clemons referred is embodied  in Florida Rep.  Ileana Ros-Lehtinen, the Cuban-American  lawmaker who will take over the chairmanship of the  influential House Foreign Affairs Committee in January when  the new Congress convenes. A die-hard anti-Castro activist who has fought for years  against the slightest easing of the 50-year-old trade  embargo against Cuba, she has also opposed to efforts to  'reset' relations with Russia and enjoys close ties to the  most-rightwing elements of the neo-conservative movement.  As such, she will no doubt try to hold hearings and move  legislation or resolutions designed to punish, or at least  embarrass, countries considered either hostile to Israel,  notably Iran, Syria, and even the Palestinian Authority,  Lebanon and Turkey, on the one hand, or too friendly with  Cuba or Venezuela, such as Bolivia, Nicaragua, and Ecuador,  and possibly even Brazil, on the other. Indeed, ties with Latin America, which had not improved  nearly as much as had been hoped under Obama, could worsen  as a result of the elections and Ros-Lehtinen's ascendancy,  according to most analysts.  'The new political environment in Washington is unlikely to  improve the atmospherics with Latin America,' noted Michael  Shifter, the president of the Inter-American Dialogue, a  hemispheric think tank.  He predicted that 'Obama will be  even more cautious than he has been to date' in engaging  Cuba and Venezuela. 'The Obama administration, while moving only modestly to  change Cuba policy, has generally tried to see the  hemisphere in less black-and-white terms than did the  (George W. ) Bush administration,' added Geoffrey Thale, an  analyst at the Washington Office on Latin America (WOLA).   'The Republican leadership in the House will challenge that  approach. 'The same applies to other parts of the world, particularly  the Middle East where the powerful 'Israel Lobby' holds as  much influence among Democrats as Republicans.  'I'm not looking forward to clownshow hearings with lunatics  denouncing creeping sharia and whipping up anti-Islamic  hysteria, which could undermine Obama's public diplomacy and  counterterrorism strategies and do some real long term  damage,' wrote Marc Lynch, a Mideast specialist, on his  foreignpolicy. com blog.  'I'm gritting my teeth in  anticipation of the next Congress becoming a platform for  Iran war hawks, hyping the issue even further in  anticipation of the 2010 elections…'Indeed, on Israel-related issues, House Republicans could  get sufficient Democratic support in the Senate to send  binding legislation to the president's desk for his  signature or veto, particularly on Iran.  'Ros-Lehtinen will be pushing the administration to strictly  enforce new sanctions law against Iran,' wrote Josh Rogin on  his 'Cable' blog at foreignpolicy. com Wednesday.  'If the mere threat of penalties under the law doesn't  entice large international companies to leave Iran, she will  call for the administration to start punishing those  companies, even if they are from China or Russia. ' Such an initiative would enjoy the backing of many Democrats  despite the administration's opposition, as could the  imposition of tougher conditions on aid to the Palestinian  Authority, Lebanon, Egypt, Jordan, and other Arab countries  — possibly even Iraq - deemed insufficiently friendly to  Israel, according to Congressional staffers. Apart from specific countries or regions, Republican control  of the House and the party's gains in the Senate could well  put paid to Obama's hopes to restore U. S.  leadership on  global issues, notably nuclear non-proliferation and climate  change.  Many Republicans, particularly those associated with  the 'Tea Party' movement, are climate sceptics. 'American leadership is critical to solving the climate  crisis, but yesterday's election made our ability to provide  that leadership much tougher,' noted Katherine Sierra, a  senior fellow at the Brookings Institution. As to Obama's arms agenda, the 'new START Treaty on reducing  U. S.  and Russian strategic nuclear arms is in intensive  care, and the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty (CTBT) remains  in its political grave,' according to CFR's Lindsay, who  also predicted cuts in foreign aid. Where Obama could find greater support in the new Congress  is in those positions that have created the most friction  with his Democratic base.  On trade, for example, Republicans are considerably more  enthusiastic about long-pending accords with South Korea,  Colombia, and Panama.  On Afghanistan, he will find it easier to resist rapidly  growing pressure from Democrats to accelerate his timetable  for withdrawing U. S.  troops beginning next July.  On the  other hand, a stronger Republican caucus will also encourage  military commanders in their battle to persuade Obama to  abandon that deadline. Overall, the election results will likely make Washington  'less ambitious abroad', according to CFR's Charles Kupchan,  a foreign policy specialist at Georgetown University.   'That's simply because during periods in which Democrats and  Republicans can't agree on policy, the default position is  to do less. ''To the degree that their might be some common ground, it  entails a less expensive foreign policy.  Members of both  parties appreciate the need to bring down the deficit, and  there is a strategic weariness stemming form the wars in  Iraq and Afghanistan,' he added. *Jim Lobe's blog on U. S.  foreign policy can be read at  http://www. lobelog. com. 