Just days after his party suffered defeat in the U. S.   congressional elections, President Barack Obama is finally  taking a twice-postponed trip to Asia. The meetings are expected to focus on security cooperation,  clean energy and global economic challenges, but, in the  wake of the electorate's rebuke, Obama has made U. S.   economic interests the main priority. In a 10-day trip, the president will visit Indonesia — where  he spent part of his childhood — as well as Japan, India and  South Korea, with stops at both the G20 meetings in Seoul  and the Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) summit in  Yokohama. Mike Hammer, a spokesman for the National Security Council,  says that Obama, whose foreign policy priorities have been  mainly hijacked by the fighting of two wars, has wanted to  focus more on Asia since the start of his administration  almost two years ago. 'The United States is a Pacific nation.  The president, as he  has said himself, is a Pacific president.  He considers  himself that,' says Hammer.  'And in that sense, clearly we  have very important interests to advance in promoting  economic growth and stability throughout the region. 'The trip comes as China is taking what the U. S.  and its  allies see as increasingly assertive positions on both  territorial and economic matters.  Highlighting Washington's  concerns over these matters, Hillary Clinton became the  first U. S.  secretary of state to attend the East Asia Summit  earlier this week, where she hoped to help mediate  territorial disputes between China and its neighbours. Clinton also traveled to other countries in the region,  laying the groundwork for Obama's highly anticipated visits  beginning this weekend. But, following Tuesday's elections, in which Republicans won  a majority in the House of Representatives and made major  gains in the Senate due primarily to economic discontent,  the goal of promoting U. S.  economic interests in Asia seems  to have become at least as important to Obama as enhancing  Washington's geo-strategic position in the region. One way the U. S.  is looking to increase economic cooperation  with India is through a joint initiative on clean energy  sources like solar and biofuels, which the countries are  expected to announce during the meetings.  This clean energy  centre would be funded in part by private sector partners,  and look to capitalise on economic opportunities in the  emerging sector. Mostly, though, the president hopes to increase U. S.  exports  to India and its neighbours. The most recent data on U. S.  unemployment, released Friday,  show significant improvement from recent months, but Obama  said he would not be satisfied until everyone looking for a  job can find one.  India and other emerging markets might  have a major role to play in that mission. 'One of the keys to creating jobs is to open markets to  American goods made by American workers,' Obama said Friday.   'And that's why I've set a goal of doubling America's  exports over the next five years.  And that's why on the trip  that I'm about to take, I'm going to be talking about  opening up additional markets in places like India, so that  American businesses can sell more products abroad in order  to create more jobs here at home. 'Obama has said that for every additional $1 billion the U. S.   exports, thousands of jobs are created in the U. S.  Already,  U. S.  exports to India have quadrupled over the past seven  years to $17 billion. That figure is set to go up even more in the near future as  a series of arms and manufacturing sales are expected to be  announced during the U. S. -India meetings. Obama hopes to sign new arms deals worth up to $12 billion,  including contracts cargo aircraft, helicopters, jet engines  and maritime reconnaissance aircraft, as well as a possible  five billion-dollar deal for ten C-17 cargo planes. He also hopes to give the U. S.  manufacturers Boeing and  Lockheed Martin a leg up on the fierce competition for a  contract to build the new fleet of India's tactical fighter  aircraft.  That deal is expected to be decided in the next  year and to be worth ten billion dollars — and thousands of  jobs. But U. S.  arms deals with India may require Washington to  ease some export-control measures and possibly accede to  Indian laws that require foreign sellers to invest in local  defence industries as an 'offset' to arms purchasers. The administration has been pressing Delhi to drop these  offset requirements and other restrictions on foreign  investment in the country's defence industries. It has also taken issue with a new law that holds suppliers  of nuclear reactors liable for accidents occurring in India.   India signed an international convention on compensation for  nuclear damage just last week, so this topic is expected to  come up at Obama's meetings in New Delhi. The administration is also mulling long-standing appeals by  Delhi to publicly support its claim to a permanent seat on  the U. N.  Security Council.  Of the five current permanent  Council members, only the U. S.  and China have not yet come  out in support of India's claim. India's appeals for the U. S.  to change its position were  strongly endorsed in the past month by separate reports  released by two independent think tanks with particularly  close ties to the administration: the Center for a New  American Security (CNAS) and the Carnegie Endowment for  International Peace.   Prime Minister Manmohan Singh, the guest of honour at  Obama's first White House state dinner one year ago, is also  expected to press the president to put more pressure on  Pakistan to curb anti-Indian terrorist groups, particularly  the Lashkar-e-Taiba, which two years ago carried out a  commando attack on high-profile targets in Mumba in which  nearly 200 people were killed. He is also expected to seek reassurance that Washington will  not carry out a rapid withdrawal from Afghanistan beginning  next year that would permit the Taliban and its Pakistani  backers to seriously threaten the government of President  Hamid Karzai, for which New Delhi has provided hundreds of  millions of dollars in economic and security assistance. *Jim Lobe's blog on U. S.  foreign policy can be read at  http://www. lobelog. com. 