Standing on a raised piece of pavement across from the tent  where she has lived for the past 10 months, Violet Nicola  threw up her hands. 'Our houses are broken again.  I've lost my things.  They  don't do anything for us.  We never see them,' she said,  referring to aid groups.  'Since the water has come in here,  we're mired in more problems. 'Below her feet, thigh-high muddy brown water extended in  every direction along the downtown's main street on Friday.   The floodwaters seeped inside Nicola's tarp-covered shelter,  washing away her belongings. Hurricane Tomas left Haiti's capital city of Port-au-Prince  relatively unscathed.  Leogane, some 29 kilometres west and  at the epicentre of January's earthquake, was drenched in  rain. The humanitarian group Save the Children says at least  35,000 people in Leogane may have been affected by flooding.   Sewage and trash carried by moving water 'will make  conditions even more conducive to deadly cholera bacteria,'  the group said in a press release. The death toll from a three-week-old cholera epidemic has  risen to at least 501, according to the Haitian Ministry of  Health.  The Haiti Epidemic Advisory System, an independent  biosurveillance network, reported new suspected outbreaks of  cholera in towns across Haiti's central area on Saturday. The peak of the cholera epidemic will come 'earlier and  faster' because of Hurricane Tomas, Christian Lindmeier, a  World Health Organisation press officer, told IPS.  A report from the Ministry of Health says nearly half of  the victims died in their communities, not in hospitals.   'The challenge is getting to them in time for the mortality  rate not to rise too much,' Lindmeier said.  Reached by IPS on Saturday evening, many humanitarian  organisations said they spent the day conducting surveys of  the destruction wrought by Tomas, not distributing relief to  those displaced from their dwellings. The USS Iwo Jima, a warship turned floating hospital touted  as a centrepiece of the U. S.  response to the storm, is  anchored near Haiti.  The ship's only response so far, at the request of the  Haitian government, has been to conduct aerial damage  assessments, according to its public information officer.  'I  don't have any of the feedback yet,' officer Jacqui Barker  said.  'There is no intel right now. 'In Grand Goave to Port-au-Prince's west, 189 shelters in  seven different camps were damaged.  Pinchinat camp in  Jacmel, to the south, was torn apart by torrential rains,  according to an internal summary of damage assessments by  the shelter-oriented cluster of aid groups.  'There is currently no humanitarian response planned for  this camp,' the document says.  'Tents were down all over the place.  It was pouring down  rain and everyone was drenched.  Shelters had been set up,  but there was no one providing transportation to these  shelters,' local resident Gwenn Mangine wrote in a post on  Facebook. Aid workers told IPS that in Cite Soleil, an oceanside slum  on Port-au-Prince's northern edge, trash-filled canals  overflowed into at least one camp.  No one has received aid  yet, they said. Across Haiti, 'Almost no shelter materials have been  distributed.  IOM is still conducting assessments,' Leonard  Doyle, press officer for the International Organisation for  Migration (IOM), told IPS.  The day before Tomas passed Haiti, aid workers planned for  some earthquake victims in low-lying areas like Cite Soleil  to be evacuated from their camps.  Mackendy Laguerre, a member of IOM's Cite Soleil camp  management team, said two Cite Soleil camp communities would  be moved into a church, if they consented.  As ominous dark clouds swirled overhead, Laguerre pointed  to the church across the street.  The ramshackle structure  appeared to be constructed of tacked-together metal sheets.   It was marked with red paint by an engineering team after  the earthquake, marking it as structurally unsound and prone  to collapse. The residents of the two nearby camps, Cozbami and  Immaculee, refused to evacuate.  Rosemond Joseph said people  in his camp were afraid their belongings would be stolen if  they left.  One woman told IPS, 'We're going to die. ' Fortunately, Cite  Soleil was not as hard hit as feared.  After a one-day storm blasted through Port-au-Prince on  Sep.  24, aid workers did not commence distributions of tents  and tarps to over 10,000 families whose shelters were  destroyed until an additional day had passed.  Those families  spent two nights in a row under the stars or huddled with  friends and family. The shelter cluster of humanitarian groups - charged with  keeping solid cover over the heads of 1. 3 million people  still living in makeshift camps - circulated a document  entitled 'Lessons learnt'. It called for a 'system in place to ensure there are  sufficient replacement and contingency stocks of shelter  materials available in country. ' At that point,  miraculously, Haiti had been spared another crisis despite a  highly active hurricane season. Over one month later, as Hurricane Tomas approached, the  United Nations made a desperate appeal for shelter  materials, citing a shortage of 150,000 tarpaulins.  'We need  emergency shelter.  We need water and sanitation supplies.   And we need as much of it as possible in place before  Hurricane Tomas hits,' said Nigel Fisher, the top U. N.   official in Haiti. 'We were depleted by the storm on the 24th and it takes a  while to build the stocks,' U. N.  spokesperson Imogen Wall  told IPS.  She pointed to the need to constantly re-supply camps with  new shelter material, adding, 'If you have tarpaulins, it  doesn't make sense to leave tarps in warehouses. 'Wall said hurricane shelter capacity is 'very limited'.  She  referred to some hurricane shelters in Leogane, but shelter  cluster documents say they were empty during and after  Tomas. 'It doesn't make sense in a country this poor to put up  single-purpose structures,' she said. A Nov.  5 shelter cluster document outlining its response to  Tomas says 100,000 families were potentially affected by the  storm, with current stocks estimated to cover just 64  percent of them.  It notes that 20,000 additional tarps are  stuck in Haitian customs. Officials say neither the cholera outbreak nor flooding from  Tomas will have any impact on planning for the upcoming Nov.   28 election. 