The corporate clout of the mining industry trumped political  ideology in Canada when members of all political parties  helped to narrowly defeat a bill late last month that would  have imposed standards on Canadian mining companies operating  in developing countries. 'We had an opportunity and we blew it,' said the bill's  architect, John McKay.  He faced 13 no-shows from colleagues  in his own party, the Liberals, the largest of the  opposition parties in the House of Commons.  In the end, the  Oct.  27 vote resulted in 140 against to 134 in favour. 'Both domestically and internationally, there is a huge  amount of disappointment in the Parliament of Canada,' McKay  told Canadian reporters. The opposition from the ruling free market-oriented  Conservative minority government was not surprising.  What  caught the eye of some observers was the number of centrist  and centre-left politicians — a total of 22 — who stayed  away from the vote or voted against the bill. Michael Ignatieff, the leader of the centrist Liberals, the  largest of the opposition parties, did not show up for the  vote.  While he failed to explain his decision publicly,  another senior Liberal MP, Martha Hall Findlay, complained  about the lack of a financial mechanism to back up the  mining reform bill.  'C-300 was seriously flawed,' she told  the Ottawa-based Embassy Magazine. At the heart of C300 was a provision that government  assistance would be withdrawn from Canadian companies that  failed to adhere to certain standards of behaviour. Canadians are involved in three-quarters of the mining  operations outside Canada, according to the Toronto-based  Prospectors and Developers Association of Canada (PDAC). Canadian companies make up a third of the 171 mining and  exploration companies where there have been reports of  conflicts with local communities in developing countries,  environmental degradation and unethical behaviour, stated a  fall 2009 independent report commissioned by the PDAC and  leaked to the media. Community conflict included 'significant negative cultural  and economic disruption to a host community, as well as  significant protests and physical violence,' the report  said. Typically, 'the hot spots' where Canadian companies figure  prominently involve gold, copper and coal operations in  countries such as India, Indonesia, the Philippines, and the  Democratic Republic of Congo.  Latin America provided the  largest number of complaints in terms of region. 'You can literally do a world tour on issues involving  Canadian mining companies which do not reflect well not only  on the industry but what I worry about as much as anything,  our own country [Canada],' McKay told IPS. However, Dennis Jones, chair of corporate responsibility  panel for PDAC, downplayed the leaked report. 'We recognise that we need to improve [corporate social  responsibility] performance in the industry and that is what  we are trying to.  What we don't agree with the NGOs is the  extent to which Canadian mining companies are involved, in  these incidents,' he said. Jones also told IPS that the bill's provisions, in which  foreign complaints would be lodged in Ottawa during a time- consuming quasi-judicial process, would be detrimental to  the reputation of both the firm targeted and the Canadian  industry as a whole. But Catherine Coumans, research coordinator with Mining  Watch Canada, countered that the Canadian mining industry is  already receiving a black eye from a number of lawsuits  launched against individual corporate players. 'What people need to understand is that this bill was not  just about corporate accountability, it was about government  accountability.  It was about making sure that the Canadian  government is not shoveling tax dollars to mining companies  that are facing serious allegations of human rights and  environmental abuses without being able to assure  accountability and transparency about these operations to  Canadian taxpayers,' she told IPS. Figures on how much money is forked over to the companies by  various Canadian government agencies, including the Canada  Pension Plan and Canadian International Development Agency,  are not publicly available, she says. The Financial Post recently estimated that the Canadian  government's Export Development Corporation alone provides  Canadian mining companies more than $20 billion in  subsidised financing and political risk insurance. Mining is a big deal in the resource-oriented Canadian  economy, and the industry's overseas activity is backed by  large Canadian banks, says Yves Engler, the author of the  'Black Book of Canadian Foreign Policy'. About 10 of the world's largest mining companies are based  on capital raised on the Toronto Stock Exchange, he said,  adding, 'There is no other example of an economic sector  where Canada is dominant. 'The result is a great deal of influence in Canadian  politics.  Engler cited the example of how the Canadian  government successfully lobbied the support of G20 countries  in an official statement at the Toronto summit this summer  to apply the lever of debt relief to pressure the Democratic  Republic of Congo - saddled with enormous debts incurred by  the notorious dictator Joseph Desire Mobutu.  The DRC had  drawn Ottawa's ire for withdrawing a controversial 1997  mining concession granted to a Vancouver mining company  during a vicious civil war, he told IPS. 'The fact that [this company] was able to get the  Conservative government to help them [shows] that the  Canadian mining industry has immense influence,' Engler  said. Both the mining and the business community ramped up their  opposition in the days leading up to the vote on John  McKay's mining reform. 'If passed, Bill C-300 will undermine the competitive  position of Canadian companies.  It could cause an exodus of  mining companies from Canada,' Michael Bourassa, a partner  and co-coordinator of the global mining group in the law  firm of Fasken, Martineau, DuMoulin, warned in the Financial  Post. Catherine Coumans says what might have rattled Canadian  politicians was the mining lobbyists' new emphasis on the  potential impact of the bill's passage on the domestic  operations of Canadian mining industry. 'The mining industry likely felt they weren't getting enough  traction with their campaign, arguing that they would be  less competitive abroad if they had to live up to  international environmental and human rights standards.  So,  they started to target members of parliament in Canada in  ridings with mining constituencies in Canada and argued that  the bill is going to kill mining jobs in Canada,' she told  IPS. 