When the Green Revolution took root in the 1960s and 1970s,  plant biologists' main concern was increasing the yield of the  staple crops on which people in poor countries depended.  This,  it stood to reason, would increase the amount of food  available to the world's poor — and decrease hunger. It generally succeeded.  But what if those staple crops were  themselves lacking in the micronutrients — such as vitamin  A, iron or zinc — that people were short on but which are  necessary for healthy bodies?Addressing this micronutrient deficiency would require a new  approach and a new effort which is only now beginning to,  quite literally, bear fruit. In sub-Saharan Africa, many people, especially in rural  areas, depend on staples such as white sweet potatoes or  white maize, which may lack sufficient quantities of the  nutrients their bodies need.  Vitamin A deficiency, for  instance, leads to at least 250,000 children going blind  each year, according to the World Health Organisation, with  half dying during the following year. Sufficient quantities can be found in other foods eaten  elsewhere in the world, but rather than undertake the  daunting task of changing diets and traditions, plant  breeders started trying to develop orange varieties of these  crops that would do well in the particular growing  conditions of sub-Saharan African countries. Research on an orange sweet potato began in the mid-1990s.   In 2005, a group called HarvestPlus, funded by governments,  foundations and research institutes and part of the  Consultative Group on International Agricultural Research  (CGIAR), became involved in the research. They set clear objectives for the breeders: increase the  level of provitamin A in the sweet potato depended on by  people in East African countries by 1,500 percent. In 2007, they released the tuber in Uganda amidst a  complementary advertising campaign meant to spread the  message that orange equals healthy and that people should  choose to plant the orange variety. They saw some nutritional impacts on people's health in 18  months. Because people were so vitamin A deficient and the sweet  potato is such a rich source of it, only 60 to 120  millilitres of the vegetable is needed to meet the  recommended daily allowance of a young child, says Jan Low,  who leads HarvestPlus's sweet potato work. As the group looks ahead to releasing new varieties of  maize, rice, cassava and other crops bred to be more  nutritious, HarvestPlus is organising a three-day conference  in Washington starting Tuesday which it says is the first- ever international meeting on how agriculture can attack  micronutrient malnutrition. The conference comes as the role of breeding as a solution  to malnutrition is approaching a crossroads, according to  HarvestPlus's director, Howarth Bouis. He says they are ready to release several crops in the next  several years, but that this step will take additional  money.  'The initial research cost for the breeding and  studies are relatively low, but when you start getting into  the final stages of development, when you get into delivery,  your costs expand and go up,' Bouis told reporters Monday. At the same time, though, he sees increased interest among  development donors in investing in nutrition as well as in  using agriculture as a tool to improve nutrition. 'In the past, those working on nutrition have not really  looked at agriculture as a primary means of improving  nutrition,' he says, noting that supplements and the  practice of fortifying prepared or packaged foods with  micronutrients were preferred. But those practices are focused more on urban consumers.  To  reach the poorest of the poor, predominantly found in rural  areas, they felt it was necessary to improve the crops  themselves — but to do so through conventional breeding that  would avoid both the regulatory and cultural hurdles, and  safety concerns, of genetic engineering. That is not to say HarvestPlus rejects the potential of  genetically engineered crops.  They have been involved with  research on a transgenic variety of rice which is rich in  iron and zinc, and Bouis says if it becomes easier to create  and release transgenic varieties in the future they would do  it. Alex Johnson, who works on the rice variety, says it is  important to note that it is of the utmost importance to  them that the plants they develop produce viable seeds,  unlike the patented plants of agricultural corporations.  In  the case of sweet potato, seeds are not even needed; farmers  just pass along cuttings to their neighbors in what Low  calls one of the most informal dissemination processes  imaginable. But there is a limit to the impact increasing the amount of  vitamins and nutrients in crops can have, of course. 'Getting all people's nutrient needs into one or two grains  and expecting that will solve their problems has serious  limitations,' says Doug Gurian-Sherman, a senior scientist  at the Union of Concerned Scientists, where he focuses on  agricultural biotechnology and sustainable agriculture.   'Something like this really has to be seen as a stopgap —  maybe an important stopgap — but not a solution in itself. 'But he welcomes HarvestPlus's emphasis on conventional  breeding methods.  'Conventional breeding has in general been  very successful for many decades but its funding tapered off  following the Green Revolution, and a lot of projects to  improve crops went straight to a transgenic approach,' he  says, 'but groups like HarvestPlus have rediscovered that  breeding works better than transgenics in many situations. '