One of the world's biggest health threats is also one of the  least recognised - more than 100 million people who literally  breathe and eat toxic pollutants like lead, mercury, chromium  every day, according to the first-ever detailed assessment. By contrast, global attention and billions of dollars are  focused on AIDS, tuberculosis and malaria, which affect  comparable numbers of people. 'Toxic pollution has been under the radar screen of most  governments for some time,' said Stephan Robinson of Green  Cross Switzerland, a group focused on environmental health,  and co-author of the assessment titled 'World's Worst  Pollution Problems Report 2010'. 'These pollution problems can be dealt with affordably and  effectively,' Robinson told IPS. Past clean-up projects designed by the groups range from the  very low-tech, low-cost to more technical engineering  projects involving soil removal at playgrounds and  groundwater remediation, he said. 'The health of roughly 100 million people is at risk from  pollution in developing countries,' said Richard Fuller,  president of the Blacksmith Institute, a small U. S.   environmental group that worked with Green Cross to conduct  the world's first detailed inventory of polluted sites. Their findings are based on data from over 1,000 risk  assessments conducted by Blacksmith Institute investigators  at polluted sites over the past two years. 'These toxic sites are rarely caused by large multinational  corporations.  It is usually local business, former  government industries or the informal, artisanal industry  like gold mining or lead battery recycling,' Fuller said. In one of the more shocking cases of toxic pollution,  doctors from Médecins Sans Frontières (MSF) visiting the  northwest Nigerian state of Zamfara early this year  discovered villages with hardly any children.  More than 400  children had died from acute lead poisoning, they later  learned.  The remaining 2,500 children in the district had  toxic levels of lead in the blood and needed emergency  treatment called chelation therapy to reduce these levels. 'Some of these kids had the world's highest lead levels ever  recorded,' said Bret Ericson, who headed Blacksmith's  'Global Inventory Project' that conducted the site  assessments. Lead is a potent neurotoxin and children are especially  sensitive, as it affects their developing nervous systems  and brains.  Many of those affected will have permanent brain  and neurological damage.  With every five-point rise in blood  lead levels there is a corresponding four-point decline in  IQ, Ericson told IPS.  Some children had levels that will  reduce their IQ 40 or more points, leaving them severely  mentally handicapped. Many of the Nigerian villagers were small-scale gold miners  who crushed gold-bearing rocks inside village compounds.   They did not know the ore also contained extremely high  levels of lead.  Children inhaled the lead dust which had  spread throughout the community. Blacksmith is working with local authorities and a U. S. - based company to decontaminate several villages and their  soils.  This is a major effort involving the World Health  Organisation, the U. S.  Centres for Disease Control and  Prevention (CDC), MSF and other partners, but the total  costs will be less than $3 million, he said. 'There is no international funding agency to deal with this  kind of thing, so finding even relatively small amounts of  money to do remediation is challenging,' he said. Ericson coordinates more than 160 investigators who have  spent the last two years finding and assessing toxic sites  around the world.  For example, there are derelict, former  one-industry towns throughout the former Soviet Union where  people are forced to scavenge in the toxic ruins of the old  dirty industries to survive. 'We receive reports like this all the time.  These sites are  tragic and even countries like Ukraine have very little  capacity to deal with it,' he said. In central Asia, communities living near uranium mining  waste sites are breathing, drinking and eating food  contaminated with radioactive wastes.  'This is very bad for  children and has many health impacts,' said Stephan Robinson  of Green Cross Switzerland.   Under the Soviet Union, those sites were sealed and  monitored, but no longer.  'Residents, having no choice or  simply unaware, use abundant uranium mine tailings for  building materials,' Robinson told IPS. Many countries lack the knowledge, technical expertise and  capacity to deal with toxic sites even though some can be  cleaned for relatively small amounts of money - 100,000 to  300,000 dollars.  Blacksmith and its partners have cleaned up  around 20 sites with a budget of 30 million dollars. Tackling these problems will require international funding,  where a billion dollars would make a huge impact on the  lives of hundreds of millions of people. Blacksmith hopes to create a health and pollution fund to  collect and distribute donations from countries and donor  agencies so something can be done to clean up the worst  problems. 'In the 20 countries where we work, we are their main  resource for assessing and dealing with toxic sites,' said  Fuller.  'We're it. '