Kyrgyzstan's glaciers are receding at what scientists say is an alarming rate,  fuelled by global warming.  And while experts warn of a subsequent catastrophe  for energy and water security for Kyrgyzstan and neighbour states downstream  reliant on its water flows, devastation to local ecosystems and the effects on  plant and wildlife could be just as severe. 'Animals and vegetation will not be unaffected and the risks for some species  will be great,' Ilia Domashov, deputy head of the BIOM Environmental NGO in  Bishkek told IPS. More than four percent - 8,400 square kilometres - of Kyrgyzstan's territory  consists of glaciers.  A natural process of water release from summer melting of the glaciers, which  freeze again during the winter, feeds many of the country's rivers and lakes.    Up to 90 percent of water in Kyrgyzstan rivers comes from glaciers, local  experts claim. This flow of water is not just important to energy needs and farming, it also  feeds interconnected ecosystems providing habitats for some of the world's  most diverse flora and fauna. Kyrgyzstan's biodiversity is among the greatest in the region and stretches  through a variety of climatic habitats, ranging from glaciers to subtropical and  temperate ecosystems. Although it only covers 0. 1 percent of the world's landmass, Kyrgyzstan is  home to one percent of its species, according to reports submitted by the  government to UN bodies.  A number of species are found only in Kyrgyzstan with endemic species and  subspecies including over 200 plant species, more than 3,000 invertebrate  species and 17 vertebrate species, as well as a further 47 sub-endemic  vertebrates. The country is home to some of the world's rarest animals, such as the Marco  Polo sheep, the Himalayan brown bear and the Siberian ibex, as well as the  endangered snow leopard, whose habitat is closely linked to the glaciers. The glaciers are a driving force behind these 'unique' ecosystems in the  region, scientists say.  'These glaciers are part of often unique mountain ecosystems.  In some places  one can go from a dry desert to lush green pastures in the space of two  hours' drive.  Glaciers are driving much of that,' Dr Stephan Harrison,  associate professor of quaternary science at the University of Exeter in the UK  told IPS. But scientists in Kyrgyzstan and at international climate monitoring bodies say  that the glaciers have receded by as much as 35 percent in the 20th century  and the melting is becoming more rapid. According to the Institute of Hydro Energy at the National Academy of  Sciences in Bishkek the glaciers are now receding at a rate more than three  times as in the 1950s.  Some groups say they have observed glaciers shrinking  by 50 metres a year. Local experts say glaciers have their own ecosystems.  Their melting water  flows into the soil which affects vegetation which acts as food for animals at  lower altitudes, some of which are prey for other animals and so on.  'Certain animals are deeply connected to the glaciers, such as the snow  leopard, and they will be affected by the rapid melting.  What will happen is  that in the short term the level of underground water will rise but in the long  term it will actually fall as glaciers disappear and this will have an impact on  ecological systems around rivers,' BIOM's Domashov said. There are other serious threats to ecosystems from the process.  As glaciers  melt large deposits of sediment are deposited in valleys below.  This affects  the local land and rivers and their existing ecosystems. Glacial melting can also lead to huge floods as natural dams formed by the ice  burst, sending lethal torrents down mountains and destroying entire forests. There have also been warnings from local experts that the melting of the  glaciers, combined with a predicted rise in temperatures, will lead to an  increase in desertification. The BIOM group told IPS studies it had been involved in predicted that climate  change behind glacial melting could see a shifting of entire ecological belts  with the altitudes of deserts, steppes, meadowlands and mountain regions  shifting between 100 and 400 metres. One of the country's most prominent areas of biodiversity is the Issyk-Kul  Lake.  At an altitude of 1,600 metres in the Tien-Shan mountains in the north  of Kyrgyzstan it is the world's second largest high mountain lake.  It has no  water outlets and the rivers which flow into it are fed primarily by glacial  waters. It has over 20 species of fish in the lake alone.  A host of species live in the  diverse landscapes around the lake which range from arid semi-deserts to the  Tien-Shan mountain range - which is home to an estimated over 4,000  different native plant species.  The lake itself is also an important stop for  migrating birds and as many as 80,000 water birds gather around it for  wintering. But its ecosystem could also be put in jeopardy by glacial melting.  Water level  changes in the lake recorded in the last decade have been put down to  melting glaciers.  Both falling and rising lake levels have been reported and some plant species  have been destroyed by the changes to the water level.  In other cases the lake  has been polluted as shoreside buildings were flooded and then toxins  washed back into the lake. In other areas locals say that they are already seeing the effects of glacial  melting on the environment.  Farmers say rivers once fed by glaciers have  begun to dry up and plants are dying out from lack of water in some areas.  Shepherds have told local media that they can no longer see some glaciers on  mountains. In Kyrgyzstan's submission to the UN Framework Convention on Climate  Change, published last year, it was predicted that the country's glaciated area  would recede by up to 95 percent over the next century. 'Some of the glaciers will have gone by the end of our lifetimes.  We must  accept a degree of global warming now whatever we do because of all the  CO2 in the atmosphere.  All we can do is hope that it can be limited,' Dr  Harrison told IPS. *This story is part of a series of features on biodiversity by Inter Press Service  (IPS), CGIAR/Biodiversity International, International Federation of  Environmental Journalists (IFEJ), and the United Nations Environment  Programme/Convention on Biological Diversity (UNEP/CBD) - all members of  the Alliance of Communicators for Sustainable Development.   