Disaster time is social networking time for a growing number  of humanitarian agencies, weather agencies, volunteers and  individuals in the Philippines, one of the most disaster-prone  countries in the world.    Indeed, experts have credited social networking websites  like Facebook and Twitter for helping keep the death toll  below 20 during Supertyphoon Megi, which hit this  archipelagic country with wind speeds of up to 269  kilometres per hour in October.    The national weather agency, the Philippine Atmospheric  Geophysical and Astronomical Services (PAGASA), launched its  official Twitter account in mid-October, just before Megi  was to hit land.    The real-time updates, which were 'retweeted' by  followers and reported by mainstream radio and television  stations, ensured that the public knew when and where the  typhoon was expected to hit hardest.  Thousands were able to  move to safer places or took precautionary measures before  the typhoon struck.     Barely a month after being set up, PAGASA’s Twitter  account now has over 28,000 followers who receive the  standard 140-character 'Tweets' on weather advisories and  storm updates.     'Social networking sites are so popular these days.  A lot  the youth and the different sectors are already using this  medium, so we decided we might as well tap it,' says Venus  Valdemoro, officer-in-charge of PAGASA’s Public Information  Unit.    This vigilance in preparing for the destruction that the  Philippines experiences each year — an average of 20  typhoons strike come each year — stems from painful lessons  learned from the fury of Typhoon Ketsana in 2009.  Although  the country is used to dealing with typhoons during the  second half of the year, erratic weather patterns have been  taking a greater toll on lives and property in recent years.    Combine this vulnerability with Filipinos’ penchant for  using new technology — the country is often called the text- message capital of the world — and the use of new media for  social needs becomes quite natural.    According to U. S. -based information technology research  firm Gartner, the Philippines, a country of 94 million  people with an Internet penetration rate of 29. 7 percent,  leads Asia in the adoption of social media websites.     It currently ranks sixth in the world on the use of two  of the most popular networking websites, Facebook and  Twitter.  The Philippines has more than 18 million Facebook  users as of November 2010 and a Twitter penetration rate of  14. 8 percent, according to digital marketing intelligence  group comScore.    Disaster and aid agencies are jumping on the social media  bandwagon.  The Philippine Red Cross (PRC), for instance, has  been using Facebook and Twitter to relay news of its  activities to the public.     The PRC’s account on Twitter gained some 3,000 followers  within days of its launch during the peak of Typhoon  Ketsana.  Its number of followers has since swelled to 42,364  and continues to grow.    'The wide scope social networking sites cover makes it  the most effective means to communicate with the general  public,' PRC secretary general Gwendolyn Pang tells IPS.    The number of PRC’s Facebook fans increased during  Ketsana and thousands of volunteers were mobilised through  the social networking website for rescue and relief  operations, Pang adds.  The organisation now has over one  hundred thousand supporters on Facebook.    'Basically, through this technology, everybody is just  one post away, making it the most cost-efficient way for us  to make our announcements public,' says Pang.    Ruben Canlas Jr, an information technology and management  consultant, says the use of social media has eliminated the  'middleman' in communication, giving the public information  straight from the source.  'In the past, we had no choice but  to rely on radio and TV for weather and emergency updates,  which are not efficient ways for disseminating urgent  information,' says Canlas.     Competing broadcasting stations also create a  'technological bottleneck', Canlas explains, when they  interview a spokesperson and thus prevent other radio and  television stations from accessing that source for a period  of time.    'Now, PAGASA itself can broadcast the information through  a tweet and media can simply report using the tweet,' he  adds.    While only the weather agency’s Twitter account is  official, PAGASA officials say they have been flooded with  requests to maintain accounts on Facebook and Friendster as  well.     The Philippines is ranked the most disaster-prone  country in the world, according to a recent study by  Brussels-based Centre for Research on the Epidemiology of  Disasters.  The World Bank lists it among the countries most  affected by climate change, and most in danger of facing  frequent and intense storms.    On average, the country is battered by 20 typhoons a  year.  Megi was just the tenth typhoon to hit the Philippines  in 2010.    In September and October 2009, typhoons Ketsana and Parma  struck the northern Philippine island of Luzon within a week  of each other, triggering the worst flooding in four  decades, and killing more than 1,000 people in the country  and in other East Asian countries it hit afterwards.   