Increasing numbers of U. S.  Gulf Coast residents attribute  ongoing sicknesses to BP's oil disaster and use of toxic  dispersants. 'Now I have a bruising rash all around my stomach,' Denise  Rednour of Long Beach, Mississippi told IPS.  'This looks  like bleeding under the skin. 'Rednour lives near the coast and has been walking on the  beach nearly every day since a BP oil rig exploded on Apr.   20.  She has noticed a dramatically lower number of wildlife,  and said that many days the smell of chemicals from what she  believes are BP's toxic dispersants fill the air. Yet her primary concern is that she and many people she  knows in the area have gotten sick. 'I have pain in my stomach, stabbing pains, in isolated  areas,' Rednour added.  'The sharp stabbing pain is all over  my abdomen where this discolouration is, it's in my arm pits  and around my breasts.  I have this dry hacking cough, my  sinuses are swelling up, and I have an insatiable thirst. 'Rednour's recent problems are a continuation of others that  have beset her for months, including headaches, respiratory  problems, runny nose, nausea, and bleeding from the ears.  In response to the massive spill last summer that released  at least 4. 9 million barrels of oil into the Gulf of Mexico,  BP admitted to using at least 1. 9 million gallons of Corexit  dispersants - which have been banned in 19 countries - to  sink the oil.  The dispersants contain chemicals that many  scientists and toxicologists have warned are dangerous to  humans, marine life and wildlife. A March 1987 report titled 'Organic Solvent Neurotoxicity',  by the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health  (NIOSH), states: 'The acute neurotoxic effects of organic  solvent exposure in workers and laboratory animals are  narcosis, anesthesia, central nervous system (CNS)  depression, respiratory arrest, unconsciousness, and death. 'Several chemicals and chemical compounds listed in the NIOSH  report, such as styrene, toluene and xylene, are now present  in the Gulf of Mexico as the result of BP's dispersants  mixing with BP's crude oil. Captain Lori DeAngelis runs dolphin tours out of Orange  Beach, Alabama.  'All my muscles hurt,' DeAngelis told IPS.  'By the time I  climb my stairs every muscle in my legs are in spasm.  I'm  coughing, I have a constant sore throat and hoarse voice. 'In addition to these symptoms, her memory is fading.   'I  have totally blanked out on a lot of important stuff,' she  said.  'I can hardly remember having talked to people who've  interviewed me.  That's how bad it is.  I'm having to bring  pen and paper with me and write down everything so I don't  forget. 'Last month, Dr.  Wilma Subra, a chemist and Macarthur Fellow,  conducted blood tests for volatile solvents on eight people  who live and work along the coast.  'All eight individuals tested had Ethylbenzene and m,p- Xylene in their blood in excess of the NHANES 95th  Percentile,' according to Subra's report.  'Ethylbenzene,  m,p-Xylene and Hexane are volatile organic chemicals that  are present in the BP Crude Oil.  The blood of all three  females and five males had chemicals that are found in the  BP Crude Oil. 'DeAngelis was one of the people tested. The health problems she and Rednour are experiencing are now  common along the Gulf Coast, from Louisiana all the way to  Florida. Chuck Barnes is director of the Alabama district of the  Eastern Surfing Association, and is responsible for  organising surfing competitions. 'In early September our local government gave the all-clear  so surfers started going back into the water,' Barnes told  IPS.  'But we immediately had several surfers get sick with  headaches, upper respiratory problems, and other things and  that's when I decided we needed to test the water. 'Barnes says that tests conducted in the Orange Beach area  'all came up toxic'. 'Now I'm worried about the fact that everybody is still  giving the all clear signal, but nobody [government] is  doing honest testing,' he said.  'We have fresh tar balls  washing up right now.  They just turned the Gulf into their  huge science experiment, and we're just sitting here under  the microscope waiting to see what happens to us. ' Joe Overstreet, a merchant seaman, lives in Fairhope,  Alabama, which is on the coast and Mobile Bay.  He also had  his blood tested by Dr.  Subra. 'I have a new rash on my body now, on my chest, and this is  after an older rash I've had that turned into blisters.  I  did the blood test in Pensacola, and when it was returned I  tested positive for six of the nine chemicals in BP's  dispersants,' he said. Overstreet worked as an oil disaster response worker for BP. 'I take Benadryl pretty much every night so I don't wake up  with a headache,' he told IPS.  'I have pains on my right  side recently, and unbelievable headaches.  When they start  happening I have to stop everything.  I have them every day. 'Overstreet, who has worked in the oil fields and is familiar  with the dangers and chemicals used, said he and his  neighbours 'could smell the Benzene coming up into the bay.   I was working on the beaches, and on low tides we can see  the clams out there.  They used to be white.  Now they are all  black.  And nobody seems to pay any attention to this.  I've  lived here all my life and I know it's not right. 'Like others, he is mystified by the lack of appropriate  response by government authorities.  'I feel like I'm in the twilight zone.  Nobody seems to be  doing anything or talking about it,' he said. DeAngelis is worried about the dolphins she has come to love  and protect, as well as humans living along the coast. 'It's devastating,' she said.  'My identity is wrapped in  being Captain Lori, but I don't know if I can go on my  waters and watch out for my babies, and nobody will tell us  what is happening.  I can't come up with the right words.   This is the meanest, most deceitful, most horrible thing the  government could do to us. '