All eyes are on Indonesia and its forest policy as climate- change negotiations continue in the upcoming global talks in  Mexico, against the prospect of billions of dollars flowing  from the planet’s major polluters to the developing world to  slow global warming.    The forests in South-east Asia’s largest country will be  among those coming under scrutiny during Nov.  29 to Dec.  10,  2010 climate change meetings in the Mexican resort city of  Cancun, environmentalists say.  These meetings are the 16th  Conference of the Parties to the U. N.  Framework Convention  on Climate Change and the 6th conference of the parties to  the Kyoto Protocol.    The potential windfall of incoming funds for countries in  the Global South stems from discussions between climate  change negotiators under a scheme known as Reducing  Emissions from Deforestations and Forest Degradation (REDD),  which opens the door for market-friendly financial  mechanisms to be used to reduce greenhouse gas (GHG)  emissions.    International efforts to make Indonesia REDD-ready in the  region arise from the archipelago’s being home to the  largest biodiversity-rich rainforest in South-east Asia.     Indonesia accounts for 94 million hectares of the South- east Asia’s 214 million hectares spread across 10 countries,  according to the U. N.  Food and Agriculture Organisation  (FAO).  Burma, or Myanmar, comes a distant second, with 32  million hectares of forest cover.    'This is why there is so much attention on Indonesia with  the ongoing discussions regards REDD,' said Patrick Durst,  FAO’s senior forestry officer for Asia and the Pacific.   'REDD could potentially be a useful tool and incentive for  countries to stop deforestation. '   Even before the prospect of new revenue streams from REDD  heading to Indonesia, Jakarta had been pursuing measures to  curb logging in its forests.  Already, its rate of forest  loss has dropped from 1. 7 percent in the 1990s to 0. 7  percent over the last five years, reveals Durst.  'Indonesia  has taken a serious approach to rein in forest clearance. '   Indonesia’s significance in this climate change  mitigation effort is also rooted in its being the country  emitting the most amount of greenhouse gases in the world,  largely due to deforestation and the clearing of forest land  for plantation agriculture, including to harvest palm oil.    In a sign that he wants the country to do more,  Indonesian President Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono made a  commitment at the September 2009 meeting of the world’s G-20  largest economies to slash his country’s greenhouse  emissions by putting the brakes on deforestation and  degradation, which are among the major contributors to  global warming.    The new benchmarks the Indonesia leader set were a  'commitment to reduce emissions from land use, land use  change and forestry by 26 percent in 2020 from the business- as-usual levels, and by 41 percent with international  assistance,' stated the Centre for International Forestry  Research (CIFOR), an environmental think tank based in  Bogor, Indonesia.    'Analysis shows that reducing Indonesia’s deforestation  rate by five percent could generate REDD payments of 765  million U. S.  dollars a year, while a 30 percent reduction  could generate over 4. 5 billion U. S.  dollars a year,' noted  CIFOR.  'Through REDD, Indonesia has a unique opportunity to  generate revenue, reduce the loss of forest cover and, in  doing so, to make a significant contribution to mitigating  global climate change. '   But this path to potential prosperity is also paved with  hurdles, the most daunting among them being corruption in  the forestry sector.    'There is serious corruption in Indonesia, Malaysia and  Papua New Guinea,' said Manoj Nadkarni, head of the forest  governance integrity programme in the Asia-Pacific region  for Transparency International (TI), the Berlin-based global  anti-corruption watchdog.  'Indonesia ranks among the world’s  worst five countries in Transparency’s Corruption Perception  Index. '   'Corruption threatens to undermine REDD,' he told IPS on  the sidelines of the 14th International Anti-Corruption  Conference that ended over the weekend in Bangkok.  'The  problem is with illegal logging.  Corruption in Indonesia’s  forestry sector is the major driver of illegal logging. '   Illegal logging worldwide 'robs the public of around 10  billion U. S.  dollars a year from state-owned forests,'  Transparency International said in its ‘Analysing Corruption  in the Forestry Sector’ report released at the just-ended  conference.  'Underpayment of taxes by legal concession  holders amounts to an additional five billion U. S.  dollars. '   The ongoing illegal logging to feed the voracious demand  for timbre for furniture and flooring across the world puts  the estimated 700 million hectares of forest lands in the  Asia-Pacific region in peril.     Some reports estimate that the current pace of illegal  logging in countries targeted by timber companies — ranging  from Burma, Cambodia and Laos to Vietnam, Indonesia and  Papua New Guinea — could precipitate a dramatic drop in  forest cover totalling a loss of 6. 6 million hectares by  2020.    Strengthening governance at the local level is key for  REDD to succeed, says Bernd-Markus Liss, an advisor on  climate-relevant forest policy for the German Technical  Cooperation in the Philippines.  'Corruption in the forestry  sector is prominent at the local level. '   'There is a need to create more transparency in  licensing, auditing and investment,' he said in an  interview.  'Well-meaning measures, with adequate checks and  balances, could also trigger corruption if local realities  are not factored in. ' 