The United States’ policy to double agricultural exports shows that its  government 'has learnt nothing' from the last food crisis, a problem reflected in  the dramatic increase in that country’s trade-distorting farm subsidies between  2007 and 2008. The U. S. ’s recent official report on its farm subsidies for 2008 to the World  Trade Organisation (WTO) shows that trade-distorting subsidies doubled  from the previous year, while permissible 'green box' subsidies reached a  historic high.  The U. S. ’s trade-distorting payments in 2008 amounted to almost 13 billion  dollars, double the 2007 figure.  More specifically, these payments included  6,25 billion dollars in amber box subsidies, which are payments linked to  production that causes dumping and considered as most distorting of  international trade. Another 6,7 billion dollars were calculated as 'de minimis' spending, which is  authorised payments in the amber box.  The U. S.  has not reported any 'blue  box spending' since 1995, which refers to production-limiting measures that  are nonetheless considered trade distorting. However, payments de-linked from production, considered as non-trade  distorting and therefore categorised as 'green box' subsidies, were higher  than ever before: 81. 59 billion dollars, largely due to an increase in food  stamps.  Despite the increases, these subsidies are still lower than the amount the U. S.   committed itself to in the draft text of the Doha Development Round: 14,5  billion dollars.  While the 2007-2008 increase happened during the Bush era, not much has  changed.  'In a context of increasing volatility in food prices, it is unfortunate  that the Obama administration learned so little from the last food price crisis,'  Karen Hansen-Kuhn, international programme director of the Institute for  Agriculture and Trade Policy, told IPS.  IATP is a U. S. -based think tank that promotes equitable and sustainable  globalisation. 'They have proposed significant new programmes to boost food security in  developing countries but at the same time trade policy is driven by an  imperative to double U. S.  exports,' explained Hansen-Kuhn.   'Their focus should be on rebuilding healthy and sustainable local food  systems at home and in developing countries, which would imply support for  developing country efforts to protect local markets for food security and rural  livelihoods.  But that kind of fresh thinking doesn’t seem to be part of the  equation yet,' she concluded. Sophia Murphy, senior adviser on trade and global governance at IATP,  questions the categorisation of trade-distorting vs non-trade-distorting  subsidies.  '‘Trade-distorting’ and ‘non-trade distorting’ is a bit of a fiction,'  she told IPS in an interview.  'Of course there are gradations.  Food stamps are not the same as direct  income support to a farmer, which is not the same as a tariff.  Food stamps are  not an issue for Africa.  But the U. S.  food and agriculture economy is  profoundly linked to the global economy, including through highly distorted  means in the sugar and cotton economies. ' IATP has tried to assess what happens at the border by comparing the cost of  production to the farm gate price and the subsequent export price.  For the  major commodities that IATP studied -- wheat, corn, soybeans, rice and  cotton -- the farm gate and export price were usually aligned. But for many years and for most of the crops, the cost of production was  higher than the export price, thus entailing a measure of dumping. The EU is reforming its common agricultural policy (CAP) for the years 2010- 2013.  A leak of a draft proposed farm subsidy policy by the EU, posted on  http://capreform. eu/the-commission-communication-leak-in-full/, reveals  the intention to maintain a decoupled basic income payment for all farmers  on a yearly basis.  This would be a direct payment to farmers that is delinked from production  levels and is supposed to have no effect on prices and therefore markets.  Additional support would be linked to environmental measures.  Member  states could also use a risk management toolkit covering income stabilisation  and insurance, compatible with the WTO green box.  The draft foresees a new  ceiling on direct payment to large farmers.  For Alex Danau of the Collectif Stratégies Alimentaires (CSA), a Bruxelles- based NGO that has closely monitored the CAP since its inception, decoupled  payment is the biggest problem.  'The WTO green box offers a completely inadequate approach' to decoupled  subsidies, he told IPS in an interview.  Decoupled basic income payments must be fundamentally challenged because  they create an 'artificial' competitiveness and rent for landowners.  They are  applied individually and do not have a collective benefit like market  regulation, Danau argued.  More specifically, such subsidies are the most expensive way to support  farmers while being out of reach for farmers from developing countries. 'Therefore, we have to re-establish a mechanism to regulate agricultural  markets, both at the European and at the international level', like the United  Nations special rapporteur on the right to food recently advocated for, he  added. 'All the CAP reforms since 1992 have gone in the same direction: increasing  decoupled payments and minimising regulatory instruments.  In our view, the  notion of trade distortion is a dogmatic criteria that applies very badly to the  reality of agriculture and to the right to food. ' Danau favours instruments of price support together with supply  management, like quotas on milk or sugar, and systems of stocking to avoid  price volatility.  'By regulation of markets we mean measures that tend to  reduce volatility and keep prices at a normal level inside a price band,' he  concluded.  