Environmentalists here are on the verge of a significant  victory in their efforts to reduce Australia’s greenhouse gas  pollution, as the Victorian state government negotiates with  the owner of the country’s 'dirtiest power station' to shut  down the coal-fired facility.    Cam Walker, spokesman of the green group Friends of the  Earth, says that it has been 'a great victory…in that we’ve  moved them in a few short years from a position of extending  the lease, almost indefinitely, to a situation where the  (Victorian) Premier is now saying there will be a staged  closure of the plant. '   The 1600-megawatt Hazelwood power station, located 150  kilometres east of the state capital, Melbourne, produces up  to a quarter of Victoria state’s electricity requirements.    An information war kicked off between environmentalists  and the plant’s owner, International Power, following a 2005  report by conservation group World Wildlife Fund that ranked  Hazelwood the largest carbon dioxide-emitting power station  in the industrialised world.    Campaigners now say that Hazelwood is Australia’s  'dirtiest' power plant, producing in excess of 16 million  tonnes of greenhouse gas pollution each year.  Additionally,  they argue the plant is a massive user of water — some 27  billion litres per year — and is the country’s single  biggest emitter of dioxin.    The campaigners say that Hazelwood, first commissioned in  1959, has become outdated and needs to be replaced with  renewable energy technology.     International Power, for its part, argues that the WWF  study was 'highly biased' and that 'Hazelwood is well down  the list of the world’s CO2 emitting power plants. ' It also  rejects claims that the plant is the most polluting in  Australia.    The company, whose global operations outside Australia  include power plants in Pakistan, Thailand and Indonesia in  addition to interests in North America, Europe and the  Middle East, argues that Hazelwood’s actual water usage is  less than half of that claimed by environmentalists and also  denies that the plant emits dangerous pollutants.    International Power purchased the previously state-owned  Hazelwood for 2. 35 billion Australian dollars (2. 3 billion  U. S.  dollars) in 1996 with a 40-year life.  The company  admits that the plant releases large volumes of carbon  dioxide — 13 percent of Victoria’s emissions, equating to  three percent of Australia’s total — but it dismisses claims  by green groups that Hazelwood was due to close in 2005 and  was only saved by an extension to its lease.    Instead, the company points to a government-approved  environmental impacts statement which, in 2005, allowed  International Power to move a road and the course of a river  in order to access brown coal reserves at Hazelwood in  return for a 445-million tonne cap on the plant’s total  greenhouse gas emissions.    But with the Victorian government now in preliminary  negotiations with Hazelwood’s owner to shut down a quarter  of the plant by 2014 as part of a process to close the  entire power station in stages, environmentalists are on the  verge of a big win.    Walker told IPS that he is surprised at the campaign’s  seemingly rapid growth.  'Just over a year ago, I really  think this wasn’t on the agenda of the state government and  they have come a very long way,' he says.    The Victorian government, led by Premier John Brumby, has  committed to reducing the state’s greenhouse gas emissions  by 20 percent, based on 2000 emission levels, over the next  decade.    While Brumby has sought federal financial backing in  order to compensate International Power for closing  Hazelwood, the Premier says that his government will act 'on  our own' if no assistance is forthcoming.    International Power also appears ready to step back from  its investment.  The company submitted a plan to the federal  government in 2008 in which it outlined a phased closure of  Australia’s older coal-fired power stations over a 10-year  period 'in return for a tariff that reflected the market  value of the asset and reflected the equity invested by the  owners. '   Company spokesman Trevor Rowe says that 'nothing has  changed' in International Power’s position since this  submission was made.     While media reports here have suggested that the payout  to International Power will be hundreds of millions of  dollars, Rowe refused to discuss with IPS the amount of  compensation that the company is seeking.    Regardless of the dollar amount that is ultimately paid  to International Power, environmentalists are keen to make  the most of the situation.    'It would represent the first coal-fired power generation  that’s been turned off in Australia for climate change  reasons, so it would be a significant step forward,' says  Mark Wakeham of Environment Victoria, one of a host of green  non-governmental organisations campaigning for the closure  of Hazelwood.    Wakeham, who was involved in early protests against the  power station in 2005, has seen the campaign grow from  actions by local campaigners and environmental groups to a  movement that receives considerable media coverage on the  back of widespread community concern about Australia’s  greenhouse gas pollution.    'I think the Hazelwood campaign has very effectively told  a clear story about what we need to do if we’re going to  reduce greenhouse gas emissions, but also that it’s possible  to do so in a very quick period of time,' he says.    The key to the campaign’s hitherto success has clearly  been its ability to result in tangible outcomes.    'For all the talk on climate change over the last ten  years, we haven’t had governments taking action to stop  polluters polluting.  Until that happens, emissions aren’t  going to actually fall,' says Wakeham.   