Prices for most basic food commodities in Egypt have finally returned to earth -  more or less - after soaring to unprecedented levels over the summer.  But  steadily rising food costs in recent years, along with the government's seeming  disinclination to take effective steps to regulate the market, continue to be the  source of mounting public anger. 'Even though the summer price hikes have eased for the time being, the  situation is still desperate,' Hamdi Abdelazim, economist and former  president of the Cairo-based Sadat Academy for Administrative Sciences told  IPS.  'If the rise in food costs persists, there will be an explosion of popular  anger against the government. 'In late summer, consumer prices for several basic food staples - including  sugar, rice, cooking oil and wheat - skyrocketed suddenly.  The hikes came on  the back of already soaring beef and poultry prices, which, according to  official figures, had risen by 40 and 25 percent respectively since the  beginning of the year. Fruit and vegetables saw the most radical price jumps.  Prices for cucumbers,  potatoes and beans doubled overnight, while those for green beans and  apples tripled in some areas.  Tomatoes, an irreplaceable staple of Egyptian cuisine, surged by more than  600 percent in some provinces, with prices rising from 1. 50 Egyptian pounds  (26 cents) per kilo to a whopping 13 pounds (2. 2 dollars). 'At these prices, my monthly salary only covers food enough for ten days,'  complained Mohamed Moustafa, a 40-year-old government engineer from  Cairo and father of three.  September and October saw increasingly frequent public demonstrations in  protest against soaring prices.  In several cases, angry demonstrators called  on President Hosni Mubarak to intervene.  'Public demonstrations in every province have drawn increasing numbers of  protesters - even though security forces aren't afraid to put down such  demonstrations with violence,' said Abdelazim.  'This if the first time that  Egypt has seen so many major protests against rising food prices since 1977. 'In that year, late Egyptian president Anwar Sadat issued a decree raising the  price of several subsidised food commodities.  The move prompted a wave of  public protests countrywide until Sadat moved to reverse the decision. In early October, Mubarak called a meeting with provincial governors where  he ordered the latter to take steps aimed at bringing local markets 'under  control. ' Ten days later, Egypt's Council of Ministers announced a decision to  eliminate customs duties on certain imported foodstuffs and to establish new  mechanisms to 'monitor' the market.  Critics say these moves did little to ameliorate the situation. 'These measures were aimed merely at pacifying public anger,' said  Abdelazim.  'But in terms of tangible results, they proved negligible; prices  remained as high as ever. 'Mohammed Sami, assistant professor at the Cairo-based Al-Sahara Research  Centre, which is affiliated with the agriculture ministry, agreed. 'The Mubarak regime has done little more than play the role of spectator,' he  told IPS.  'There's no other country in the world in which the public must call  on its head of state to personally intervene to solve food shortages. ' The government attempted to absolve itself of responsibility for the crisis by  blaming runaway prices - especially those of fruit, vegetables and meat - on  unusually high summer temperatures.  Atypically hot weather this year,  officials claimed, had decimated harvests and caused abrupt shortages.  'The jump in the price of vegetables and meat are a result of low annual  yields due to poor climatic conditions,' Prime Minister Ahmed Nazif declared  in mid-October.  'And this is out of the government's hands. 'According to Sami, however, there was more to the shortage than simple hot  weather. 'The heat wave this summer was only partly to blame for fruit and vegetable  shortages,' he said.  'In addition to hot weather, there was also a virus that  afflicted this year's tomato crop, which ended up killing some 80 percent of  the summer harvest. 'Sami's assertions appear to be borne out by accounts from tomato farmers. 'A virus destroyed most of my summer harvest, which fell this year from the  usual 50 tons per acre to only 10 tons,' Mohamed Khairy, a tomato farmer in  the Nile Delta province of Beheira, some 200 km north of Cairo, told IPS.  'I  tried to get assistance from the agriculture ministry, but my pleas fell on deaf  ears. 'Critics further point out that shortages were exacerbated by exploitive  merchants - and the government's seeming reluctance to regulate their  activities. 'Unscrupulous traders took advantage of the shortage to raise retail prices  through the roof, allowing them to realise enormous profits,' said Sami.  'And  the government has continued to allow them to get away with it. ' Abdelazim concurred, noting that Egypt's ruling regime was largely composed  of businessmen and 'monopolistic traders'. 'The regime, which is characterised by economic corruption and chaos,  doesn't regulate the local market or move to break up monopolies - it merely  looks on as consumers are exploited,' he said.  'Meanwhile, Egypt's limited  civil society plays a negligible role in protecting the consumer. ' Abdelazim went on to dismiss the notion that runaway food prices could be  attributed solely to the 'global financial crisis', as has often been claimed by  Egyptian officialdom. 'The global crisis has led to rising food costs all over the world, but the price  hikes in Egypt have little if any connection with the global recession.  When the  price of certain products falls internationally, they nevertheless continue to  rise in Egypt. 'With the arrival of autumn harvests in late October and early November, fruit  and vegetable prices have gradually stabilised - although they still remain  about 20 percent higher than usual.  Tomato prices, too, have returned to  earth, to alight at about 2 Egyptian pounds per kilo. 'But now that tomato prices have come back down, sugar prices have abruptly  surged,' said Abdelazim.  'It seems that whenever prices for one product  stabilise, the cost of some other vital food commodity begins to soar. 'Protests, meanwhile, have subsided this month, 'because the public's  attention is currently focused on the Nov.  28 parliamentary elections,' added  Abdelazim.  'But this doesn't mean public anger isn't still boiling over steadily  rising food costs. ' 