The Canadian public is completely at odds with its own  government on climate change, a new survey revealed Friday. A large majority of Canadians want urgent action on climate,  including redirecting military expenditures to reduce  greenhouse gas emissions.  In sharp contrast, the Stephen  Harper-led Conservative minority government used  parliamentary trickery to kill pending legislation to reduce  emissions that had already been passed by the majority of  Canada's elected representatives. 'This is a real low point in Canadian democracy,' said  Andrew Weaver, a climate scientist at the University of  Victoria. 'It's an abuse of democracy like we've never seen before in  this country,' Weaver told IPS. Canada has a multi-party parliamentary system.  In May, a  majority of Canada's elected members of parliament (MPs)  passed Bill C-311, the Climate Change Accountability Act,  committing the country to a 25 percent reduction in  greenhouse gases by 2020.  The only reason Bill C-311 passed  is that the anti-climate-action Harper government has just  one-third of the votes. After Bill C-311 was passed, unelected senators in the  Canadian Senate were supposed to review and debate its  merits and then pass the bill into law as per usual.  The  Senate's role is to give pending legislation a second look,  offer suggested changes, but not overturn what elected MPs  have already voted for. Instead, Conservative senators successfully engineered a  snap vote Tuesday night to kill the bill without notice and  without debate when many other senators were not present. 'Whether you supported the bill or not, they prevented any  discussion, any debate about it.  There should be an election  over this,' said an outraged Weaver. Weaver also pointed out that global temperature measurements  taken through the end of October show this year has been the  warmest ever recorded.  The latest climate science continues  to show climate change is happening faster and with more  impacts than previously projected. Prime Minister Harper said Bill C-311 'sets irresponsible  targets. . .  throwing hundreds of thousands and possibly  millions of people out of work'.  Weaver scoffed at Harper's exaggerated claim of millions of  jobs at risk.  'Does he think Canadians are morons?'As for emissions reduction targets, scientists say a 25- percent reduction from 1990 levels by 2020 is not nearly  enough to stabilise global temperatures at two degrees C  above what they have been for tens of thousands of years.   Canada's reductions should be at least 45 percent by 2020  and reach zero by 2050, based on the latest science. According to Weaver, the message the Harper government is  sending to the upcoming United Nations climate change  conference in Cancun, Mexico starting at the end of the  month is that 'Canada is a dinosaur. . . with a government  controlled by the oil patch and the tar sands industry. 'In contrast to the actions of its government, the Canadian  public agrees industrialised countries like Canada have an  international obligation to significantly reduce their  emissions, according to the poll released Friday.  Conducted  by leading polling agency Environics Research Inc. , it found  that some 85 percent of Canadians surveyed agreed that  'Industrialised countries . . .  should be the most responsible  for reducing current emissions. ''Canadians agree that rich countries must bear most of the  responsibility for reducing emissions,' says Andrea Harden- Donahue of Council of Canadians, a large Canadian NGO and  one of the co-sponsors of the poll. 'If Canadians were deciding our climate policy we would be  following a very different path,' Harden-Donahue told IPS. The vast majority (87 percent) of Canadians polled agreed  that climate change results from too much focus on economic  growth and consumerism.  And they also overwhelmingly agreed  with the statement that: 'We need to have an economy that is  in harmony with nature, which recognises and respects the  planet. 'The poll questions are based on those agreed to by  participants at the World People's Conference on Climate  Change and the Rights of Mother Earth in Cochabamba, Bolivia  earlier this year.  The Canadian poll is one of several polls  that are part of a Global Referendum on Climate Change that  will document the views of the people of world.  The final  results will be presented at the U. N.  climate conference in  Cancun and present some context for what happens at the  official negotiations. The poll also found that over 70 percent of Canadians  support redirecting military spending toward efforts to  reduce greenhouse gas emissions, as well as the idea of a  World Climate and Justice Tribunal to judge and penalise  countries and corporations whose actions have contributed  climate change.  Over 80 percent of Canadians believe the Canadian government  should invest in 'green jobs' and transition programmes for  workers and communities negatively affected by a shift away  from fossil fuels. 'There is a real disconnect between the government and the  public in Canada on climate change,' said Harden-Donahue.   That disconnect raises important questions about the state  of democracy in Canada.  And the killing of Bill C-3111  raises even more questions, she says. Canadian media are complicit in their failure to cover  events like the World's People's Conference and to  consistently report on how climate change will impact  Canadians and developing countries, she said. Canada was widely criticised at the last climate meeting in  Copenhagen for ignoring its international commitments to  reduce emissions under the Kyoto Protocol, for refusing to  agree to any mandatory emissions cuts and for defending the  enormous emissions of greenhouse gases from Alberta tar  sands. 'Canada's international reputation is tarnished because of  the Harper government's failure to act on climate change,'  said Harden-Donahue. Through manipulation of the media and pandering to the  uninformed, the Harper government pretends to be taking  action on climate while doing the opposite, said Weaver.   'This government acts as if climate change is a big game. '