U. S.  regulators are poised to decide as early as next week  whether to approve a genetically modified salmon for human  consumption. It would be the first GM animal approved for human  consumption, and there are fears that the review process is  overlooking key ripple effects of approving the fish. These ripple effects are both positive, such as public  health benefits, and negative, such as environmental  degradation, say researchers. The debate over the salmon, which would be raised on fish  farms and which contains inserted genes from two other  species of fish that allow it to grow faster and require  less feed than conventional salmon, has focused on whether  the fish would pose a hazard to human health or, were it to  escape into oceans or rivers, to wild salmon populations.  The U. S.  Food and Drug Administration is charged with  evaluating these risks, but critics say the agency is not  prepared and does not have a broad enough mandate to fully  examine all the implications of allowing this fish on  grocery shelves. And those implications — both positive and negative — could  be vast. 'This is a major technological breakthrough that could lower  the cost of production and continue to expand the salmon  market,' says Martin Smith, an environmental economist at  Duke University. This, he says, follows a trend that has existed in salmon  farming for the past couple decades: technological  innovations have lowered the price to produce salmon.  As a  result, production of the fish has expanded so much that  even with increased demand salmon prices have continued to  decline. 'If you look at what is happening with the GM salmon, you  expect you might see something similar,' he told IPS. Smith was the lead author on a study published in this  week's issue of the journal Science.  It concludes that the  FDA's analysis fails to acknowledge that the new, transgenic  salmon might affect the total production and consumption of  salmon. On the one hand, lower salmon prices could have beneficial  public health benefits, since eating salmon has been  associated with improved heart and brain health. More people would be able to eat salmon, including people  with lower incomes who are more susceptible to dietary  illnesses but who would now have access to fresh salmon that  they could not previously afford, notes Smith. But it would also likely exacerbate environmental impacts. The ocean pens in which most farmed salmon are raised are  notorious for allowing large quantities of antibiotics and  additives to leak out and damage the surrounding  environment, as well as leading to farmed salmon escaping  and potentially spreading disease to and contaminating the  gene pool of wild salmon. So far, the debate has been dominated by the prospect of one  of these GM salmon escaping into the wild, though the  company developing the salmon, AquaBounty, says the vast  majority of the fish will be sterile and they will be  unlikely to survive in the warm waters of Panama, where they  will be raised. Of much greater concern, says the Science study, is the fact  that producing more salmon in aquaculture facilities will  require even more wild fish to be caught to feed the farmed  fish. Many environmental groups criticise salmon aquaculture as  inherently unsustainable because it tries to raise a  predator in captivity, which requires massive amounts of  feed. Typically, three pounds of feed fish is required to produce  one pound of farmed salmon.  The GM salmon, called  AquAdvantage salmon, will grow faster and thus have shorter  life spans, meaning it will require 10 percent less food per  pound of salmon produced, according to AquaBounty. But with feed fish stocks already under great pressure from  overfishing, the prospect of needing to catch more feed fish  to raise even more farmed salmon is worth examining, says  Smith. 'Salmon farming technology has improved dramatically in the  past several decades, but there is still a requirement to  feed salmon wild fish,' he says.  'You can't ignore the  inputs that go into the production of farmed salmon any more  than you can ignore the inputs that go into the production  of other types of foods. 'He and his co-authors recommend the FDA expand its analysis  to examine as many of these consequences — both positive and  negative — as possible, and if it does not have the  authority to expand that analysis the U. S.  Congress should  look into expanding the agency's mandate. So far their analysis has focused primarily on examining the  health risks associated with eating the transgenic salmon  and checking for any known toxins or allergens, but new  technologies may require new scope to assess their impacts -  AquAdvantage salmon will certainly not be the last GM animal  to come up for approval for human consumption. These innovations might eventually lead to new, more  sustainable solutions to problems like how to feed a rapidly  expanding human population that will need to raise enough  animal protein and other nutrients with limited resources,  but if not addressed the side effects of these innovations  could outweigh their benefits. Smith thinks it is not too late — or too difficult — for the  FDA to expand its analysis of AquAdvantage salmon, but even  if it is, he says, 'It is more important to establish a  precedent of looking at these implications.  If they  establish the right precedent for this case, then we can  expect a broader analysis in the future. '