With the Atlantic bluefin tuna being fished to extinction, environment groups  have increased their pressure on governments to take action to protect the  species. Organisations such as the World Wildlife Fund (WWF), the Pew Environment  Group and Greenpeace have mounted a strong campaign at the start of a 10- day meeting here of the International Commission for the Conservation of  Atlantic Tunas (ICCAT), the much-maligned agency charged with managing  bluefin stocks. The groups want ICCAT’s 48 members to suspend industrial fishing of the  eastern Atlantic Bluefin, the world’s favourite marine delicacy, until  sustainable measures are in place and the species shows signs of recovery.   Or, at a minimum, they would like to see a reduction in annual fishing quotas  from the current 13,500 tonnes to 6,000.  'Our position is anchored in science,' said Gemma Parkes, spokesperson for  WWF Mediterranean.  'We are not against sustainable fishing.  ICCAT’s own  scientists have said that reduction gives a strong chance of recovery for the  species. 'Since 1970, bluefin stocks have plunged by 80 percent, according to  scientists.  The fall has been attributed to the over-exploitation that seeks to  satisfy some developed nations’ voracious appetite for fish, particularly as  used in sushi.  Around 80 percent of bluefin caught in the Mediterranean is exported to  Japan.  The Asian country, the United States and the European Union account  for 70 percent of the international bluefin tuna market.  Parkes told IPS that the main problems affecting the bluefin were the lack of  respect for rules and the use of large, high-tech industrial vessels known as  purse seine fleets that 'encircle shoals of spawning tunas, scooping them up  in vast purse-like nets. ' Some of these 'destructive' vessels are involved in illegal fishing and their  activities are hard to trace, she said.  'The common ground that we all have is that the industrial purse seine fleets  should be ended,' Parkes said.  WWF has warned that if current fishing rates  continue, the Mediterranean could lose the bluefin that spawn in its waters by  2012.  The Pew Environment Group has meanwhile called for creating spawning  ground sanctuaries in the Mediterranean Sea and the Gulf of Mexico, the  fish’s only known breeding areas.  This would mean prohibiting the catch of  bluefin in these grounds. 'It’s logical — you don’t kill the fish as they’re breeding,' said Dr.  Susan  Lieberman, head of the group’s delegation to the ICCAT meeting and director  of its international policy. While Pew, too, is in favour of a total suspension of bluefin fishery, Lieberman  told IPS that environmentalists were 'not encouraged' by the positions of the  EU, Japan or the U. S.  (which hasn’t clearly outlined its stance besides  supporting a reduction in quotas).  'We don’t think governments have the courage to do this,' she said. Pew and other groups said that ICCAT needed to take urgent action to stop  the 'massive fraud' taking place in the bluefin fishery sector. A recent report by the International Consortium for Investigative Journalists  (ICIJ) put the amount gained from illegal Bluefin fishing activities between  1998 and 2007 at 4 billion dollars.  This includes fleets’ underreporting of fish  caught, providing fish farms with illegally caught fish, and governments giving  lower figures for their fishermen’s catch. 'There is a lot of cheating when it comes to bluefin tuna,' Lieberman told IPS.   'Every country has an equal responsibility. 'Governments involved in the current talks seem unlikely to accept all the  demands or recommendations by environmentalists.  Pierre Amilhat, head of  the EU delegation who opened the official start of the talks on Friday, said  that the negotiations were going to be 'difficult'. He told IPS, however, that he was 'fairly optimistic' that solid solutions would  be found.  But he declined to give journalists an exact figure for the new  quotas which the ICCAT meeting is seeking to establish, saying that it would  be 'between 0 and 13,500 tonnes'. 'There are too many boats fishing and too few fish,' Amilhat acknowledged. ICCAT’s chairman, Dr.  Fabio Hazin, said that the current meeting would  'inaugurate a new era of sustainability and responsibility in fulfilling' the  agency’s mandate as a regional fisheries management organisation.  He said  that the 'dark ages of ignoring scientific advice' is hopefully being left behind  for good. ICCAT has been slammed in the past for ignoring the counsel of its own  environmental experts.  But at a meeting in Doha last March, countries  involved in Atlantic tuna fishing and trade including Japan, the U. S. , the EU,  Canada and Norway pledged that they would use the Paris meeting to show  their commitment to following scientific advice.  'They should take into account the findings of experts much more than they  do at present,' said Jorge Luis Valdes, head of ocean science at the  Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission (IOC) at UNESCO, the UN’s  cultural and scientific agency. 'The fish have reached a level of real risk, and my recommendation would be  for the policy makers to listen to the scientific experts,' he told IPS.   