Rising food prices have not yet reached crisis levels but they  are expected to remain very volatile for about the next  decade, researchers said Thursday. The conclusions were based on a new study of the factors  that contributed to the 2007-08 food crisis, which  researchers hope will shed light on what actions might be  taken to avoid food crises in the future. 'There were many suspects for what caused the crisis, but  little evidence,' said Derek Headey, a research fellow at  the International Food Policy Research Institute, who co- authored the report.  'Three years on, there is more  evidence. 'The IFPRI study cites a 'perfect storm' of factors: rising  energy prices, demand for biofuels, depreciation of the U. S.   dollar, and a variety of trade shocks such as panic  purchases, export restrictions and unfavorable weather. Many of these factors have helped contribute to the rises in  food prices that have occurred in the second half of this  year, leading some to wonder whether another food price  crisis might be on the horizon. Headey and his co-author, IFPRI director general Shenggen  Fan, think that possibility is still unlikely but hope that  pinning down the causes of past crises will point out ways  to mitigate the damage of future food price spikes before  they get out of control. They say their research disproves several prominent theories  for what triggered the crisis, including dramatic increases  in demand from India and China, declines in agricultural  yields or the amount of grain held in reserve stocks, and  speculation on futures markets. Speculation could have played a role and that role should be  examined further because it could exacerbate causes for  price spikes in the future, says Headey, but it was not a  driving factor in the price spikes. After these prices peaked in summer 2008, the number of the  world's hungry crossed the one billion threshold in 2009 to  reach an all-time high.  The U. N. 's World Food Programme  estimates that 925 million people will suffer from chronic  hunger this year, a reduction of 9. 6 percent but still above  the pre-crisis number of 830 million hungry. There have been fears that currently rising food prices  could lead to another spike in these numbers. The U. N. 's Food and Agriculture Organisation said Wednesday  that it expects global cereal production to drop two percent  this year, rather than rise 1. 2 percent as it previously  estimated.  It also said the amount of food imported globally  currently adds up to 893 billion dollars.  If it were to pass  the $1 trillion mark, it would be at a level not seen since  the 2007-08 food price crisis. Both these factors would have impacts on food prices, the  agency said, though it noted that there is still no crisis  as yet. Since June wheat prices have increased by 60 percent and  maize prices by 50 percent, but Fan says these increases are  have not been rapid enough to warrant the 'crisis' label. He also says that there are larger food stocks in reserve  now than in past years. Food stocks, he says, could play a key role in helping to  avoid future crises.  Ideally, he would like to see the  creation of a global grain reserve system to be administered  by an agency like the WFP and have stocks located in  geographically strategic locations around the globe in order  to ensure that food prices — and the hunger they can lead to  — can be avoided. Fan also sees a need for a global warning system that would  track not only food prices but energy prices, which have a  lot of influence over the price of some foods, especially  grain from the U. S. 'If we only focus on agriculture we're going to miss the  warning signals,' says Headey. Energy prices have even more influence over food prices and  production now with the emergence of biofuels, which siphon  land and some crops, like maize, away from food markets.   This emergence of biofuels acted as a sort of shock on food  markets in 2007-08, helping to rapidly drive up prices,  according to the IFPRI report released Thursday. 'It's clear we need to stop subsidising biofuel,' says Fan.   'It's not a solution to climate change, environmental  problems or increasing poor farmers' incomes. 'He also cites inflation as a result of rising energy prices  that can itself result in people being less able to afford  food.  This, he says, is currently happening in India and  China.  'If fuel prices continue to rise, I can guarantee you  that food prices will rise as well,' he says. But Fan is just as certain that steps like the creation of a  global network of food stocks are critical to head off  future emergencies.  'I firmly believe that if these actions  are taken we can avoid another crisis,' he says. Even if the current rises in food prices do not turn into a  full-blown crisis, the price volatility that is occurring  today follows the pattern of past price crises.  The spikes  in commodity prices that occurred in 1974, for instance, had  similar causes as those that led to the 2007-08 food price  crisis, says Headey, and were followed by a decade of price  volatility. 