South African retail giant Pick-‘n-Pay increased its stake from 25 to 49 percent  in TM Supermarkets — Zimbabwe’s largest grocer — in October in a deal worth  about 13 million dollars.  But, while the champagne corks pop in the boardroom,  employees are not upbeat. Companies investing in Zimbabwe have been met head-on with demands for  salaries that are above Zimbabwe’s poverty datum line of 462 dollars per  month for a family of five, as calculated by the Zimbabwe National Statistical  Agency. While the Zimbabwean government welcomes South African retail giants’  investments as 'employment creation vehicles', shop assistants and floor  managers working for these companies say these investments are tainted by  unfair employment conditions and labour practices. In 2009, Shoprite employees in Bulawayo — Zimbabwe’s second largest city  and home to the only Shoprite outlet in the country - went on strike  demanding salary increases.  Earlier in November a former manager at Makro retailers won a suit against  his erstwhile employer for unfair dismissal dating back to 2005. A retailer such as Shoprite, with stores in 15 African countries outside South  Africa, has provided Zimbabwean consumers with fully stocked shelves and  squeaky-clean aisles during the country’s slow economic recuperation. However, its hiring of Zimbabwean workers has not been characterised by  competitive salaries, workers who spoke to IPS say. 'Many of us imagined that working for a South African company would mean  salaries better than workers in other supermarkets but we had to face the  facts,' exclaims Duduzile Moyo*, a Shoprite shop assistant. 'It is difficult to live on this salary, especially when you know that a person  doing the same job in South Africa can survive on their salary,' Moyo says,  expressing a common sentiment here among employees working for South  African firms based in Zimbabwe. The average salary for a shop assistant in Zimbabwe is 150 dollars, while  remuneration for the same job reportedly stands at about 500 dollars in  South Africa.  This discrepancy has employees here pushing for salaries that meet regional  standards, or at least those of the country from where these grocery retailers  originate. A shop assistant in Bulawayo needs about 100 dollars to cover transport and  housing per month, compared with the 150 dollars they earn. 'There is no (adherence to) best practice here.  We are happy to have jobs  because of these South Africans, but that is where it ends for me because I  still work long hours for low wages,' Gill Dube*, a shop assistant at TM,  points out. With Pick-‘n-Pay’s recent investment the company promised to inject new  capital into TM Supermarkets and to do much needed refurbishment,  including new fittings, generators and point of sale equipment. Casual and permanent employees who spoke to IPS however noted that  nothing was mentioned about improving their working conditions, ensuring  fair labour practices and paying them a living wage. It has been particularly tough for casual workers who complain they have little  or no protection when facing dismissal.  Their contracts can be terminated  without warning and they also do not enjoy benefits such as medical aid. 'There is no pension for casual workers so, if your contract is terminated, that  is it.  You are just as good as someone who never worked,' Dube laments. Economist Bernard Guruve says, 'it is a difficult line that these South African  investors have to walk as their employees expect to be paid the equivalent of  what their colleagues are getting in South Africa but Zimbabwe offers a  difficult and also different macro-economic interpretation. 'While the economy itself is stabilising, companies find they still cannot match  salary demands that meet the poverty datum line -- despite doing relatively  well both here and in the countries where they are headquartered,' Guruve  adds.   Many Zimbabwean consumers contend that the presence of South African  grocery retailers has given them an opportunity to not only sample South  African products that are cheaper, but that these retailers offer shoppers  choices that had disappeared during the country’s recent past of price  controls. 'We are happy these South Africans have been allowed to come in as things  like chicken coming from South Africa are cheap,' insists Duke Banda, a  secondary school teacher. 'We now get anything from shops like Shoprite that we cannot get in other  supermarkets, which I think is a positive thing -- for consumers who have the  money,' Banda adds with some circumspection.  However, local poultry producers have complained, saying they are being  pushed out of business by cheap South African imports.  They continue to  lobby the government to ban the importation of certain goods, which include  genetically modified products. *Names withheld due to fear of reprisal.  