It is the national animal of several Asian countries, lends  its name to brands as varied as budget airlines to alcoholic  beverages, and features prominently in Asian mythology,  including the Chinese zodiac.  But unless there is a dramatic  turnaround for the tiger, conservationists say, this giant  feline could become extinct before the next Chinese Year of  the Tiger in 2022.    In particular, the region needs to put a stop to black  markets along Burma, Thailand and China’s shared borders,  which play a crucial role in facilitating the illicit trade  in tigers and other endangered species, say wildlife  conservation groups.    They raised this concern as the International Tiger Forum  — the highest-level political meeting to ever discuss a  single species — was underway in St Petersburg, Russia from  Nov.  21-24.    'Illegal trade poses the most immediate and dire threat  to the survival of tigers.  Moreover, it puts all Asia’s big  felines at serious risk,' says TRAFFIC South-east Asia  regional director William Schaedla.     'Wildlife laws in Myanmar (or Burma) and Thailand clearly  prohibit trafficking in tigers and other big cats.  We urge  authorities to bring the full weight of the law to bear upon  traffickers,' he adds.    In collaboration with the World Wildlife Fund (WWF)  Greater Mekong Programme, TRAFFIC South-east Asia launched  here on Nov.  19 its ‘The Big Cat Trade in Myanmar and  Thailand’ report, which documents black market sales of  various body parts of an estimated 400 large wild felines  during nearly a decade of investigations in Burma and  Thailand.     The report is accompanied by a video documentary,  ‘Closing a Deadly Gateway’, which includes interviews with  poachers and alarming footage of butchered tigers.    'With as few as 3,200 wild tigers worldwide, the ongoing  large-scale trade documented in this report cannot be taken  lightly,' says Schaedla.    According to the TRAFFIC study, provincial markets and  retail outlets at the Burmese towns of Mong La, near the  China border and Tachilek, on the Thai border, played a  pivotal role in the large-scale distribution of big cat  parts including whole skins, bones, paws, penises, and  teeth.     Ironically, it is the legendary prowess of the tiger that  is leading to its rapid demise.  From its traditional  consumption as a 'folk medicine', says Schaedla, the tiger  trade is now 'driven a lot by affluence, new money in Asia,  and people picking these things up as in vogue or sort of  trendy activities. '   'There is an urgent need to step up efforts if the region  is to save its declining tiger populations.  We need to  enhance information gathering and ensure government and non- government agencies share information in transparent and  timely ways from the local level to the regional scale,'  says Dr Peter Cutter, coordinator for WWF Greater Mekong  Region’s tiger conservation in Thailand.   Tiger populations in the Mekong region — including south- west China, Cambodia, Laos, Burma, Thailand and Vietnam —  have plummeted from an estimated 1,200 during the last Year  of the Tiger in 1998 to about 350 today.     'Alarmingly, the landscape between Myanmar and Thailand  holds the greatest hope for tiger population recovery in  this region,' says Cutter.  'But this can only happen if  there are unprecedented and coordinated regional efforts to  tackle illegal wildlife trade. '    'A critical part of saving wild tigers must be to shut  down the illegal trade in tiger parts,' says Michael  Baltzer, head of WWF’s Tigers Alive initiative.  With all the  tiger range countries convening at the 'groundbreaking'  International Tiger Forum in Russia, Baltzer adds, 'illegal  trade such as this must stay front and centre in the  negotiations. '    The recently launched findings point to a flourishing  illegal trade in tigers and other wildlife through Burma  that thrives despite national and international laws.  The  majority of this trade occurs in areas out of government  control between northern Burma and southern China, which  makes it difficult to coordinate effective enforcement  action.    To this end, the International Tiger Forum hopes to  garner support to double the number of tigers in the wild by  2022, unveil an international consortium to combat wildlife  crime, and receive pledges to tighten protection by all 13  tiger- range countries — India, Indonesia, Bangladesh,  Nepal, Russia, Bhutan, China, Cambodia, Laos, Vietnam,  Burma, Thailand and Malaysia.       'The bureaucrat can make a difference, a good senior  officer in the district can make a difference, a park  director who is excellent (and) knows what to do can make a  huge difference,' says tiger conservationist Valmik Thapar  in the ‘Closing the Deadly Gateway’ documentary.  But, Thapar  adds, 'Where are they? Why are they so few and far between?  We’re all waiting. '   'We’re not under any illusions that we’re going to  completely eradicate this (poaching and smuggling of  tigers), but we need to disrupt it.  And by taking out the  big players we are disrupting it,' says Schaedla.    In Malaysia for example, Schaedla reveals, there are 'at  least two' other big-name wildlife traffickers apart from  Anson Wong, who in September was sentenced to six months  jail and fined 61,300 U. S.  dollars for illegally exporting  95 boa constrictor snakes.  In October, Malaysian authorities  also seized two Bengal tigers owned by Wong from his private  farm in Penang.    Faced with poaching, illicit trade and land encroachments  to make way for urban development, three of the tiger's nine  subspecies — the Bali, Javan and Caspian tigers — were wiped  off the record during the 20th century.  The South China  tiger, the parent species from which all tiger subspecies  stem, is already functionally extinct in the wild.   