Mary Kimani wishes her husband were still alive.  Holding her one-year-old son  in one hand and a hoe in the other, she recounts with bitterness how she and  her children lost their livelihood to her husband’s family. 'The road accident that took my husband changed my life completely.  That  was the end of me and my children,' Kimani told IPS.  She was married for  seven years and, together with her late husband, worked hard to own land, a  house and a vehicle. But only a few months after she buried her husband, her in-laws ejected her  and her two children from the homestead.  Today, even as she is haunted by  the past, she works hard to keep hope glowing, working as a casual labourer  on neighbourhood farms. 'I must move on.  I have to feed my children, educate them and help them  make a descent living,' she told IPS.  Kimani’s in-laws sold the house and land before giving the vehicle to a close  relative.  She had no right to the property.  In Kenya, many women lose their  rights to property after divorce or the death of a spouse.  According to human  rights experts, women’s socially sanctioned dependence on men leaves them  vulnerable to 'cultural traditions' that do not recognise women’s ownership of  land and other property. Men most often are willing to enforce such so-called customs, says Njoki  Njehu, executive director of Daughters of Mumbi Global Resource Centre.  The  organisation is an independent, non-ethnic network bringing together people  of diverse origins as well as 'honouring women's roles in anchoring family and  community'. 'But it is not only men; some women who were themselves denied rights  because of retrogressive practices uphold such practices to deny other women  their rights,' Njehu told IPS.  She explains that if a mother did not get land she  will not champion her daughter or daughter-in-law's cause in this regard. Kimani appreciates that Kenya’s newly passed constitution represents gains  for the women of Kenya.  Section 40 of the Kenyan constitution promises the  right to own property to 'every person', while section 60 ensures 'equitable  access to land' and 'security of land rights' but without mentioning women or  acknowledging their historical landlessness. Njehu recalls the 2005 referendum: 'Politicians mobilised communities to  oppose the draft constitution as it would allow women to inherit land. 'Kimani is worried that men won’t enforce the constitution as it stands.   'Customs and practices still hold women back.  We are discriminated against in  several areas that include land and property rights.  The society positions men  as the sole property owners,' Kimani points out. The customary laws of some ethnic groups demand that land and other  property that a woman acquires before or during the marriage belongs to her  husband, who can sell it without her consent.  'The key role of a woman is to  take care of the property.  Should your husband die, others stream in for  inheritance.  You can’t escape,' says 32-year old Grace Akinyi*.  Akinyi raises the issue of 'wife inheritance' where widows are forced to marry  again.  It is still being practised, especially in western Kenya.  According to her,  should a woman decline to be inherited and she succeeds, she is often under  constant pressure to sell the property at discounted prices.  She has been a victim of this practice.  'A woman who owns land is still  defined through her ties to men.  Women are not recognised as owners in title  deeds,' laments Akinyi. According to international nongovernmental organisation (NGO) Human Rights  Watch, customary laws in sub-Saharan Africa have greater influence than civil  law when it comes to women’s property rights.  And, acccording to a report  entitled 'The National Land Policy: Critical Gender Issues and Policy  Statement', only five percent of women in Kenya own land. Hubbie Hussein, director of Womankind Kenya, women must be empowered  as part of the effort to eradicate poverty as they produce 80 percent of food  crops in sub-Saharan Africa but have no claim to land.  Womankind Kenya is a  local NGO based in North-Eastern Province, Kenya, with its head office in  Garissa. The predominantly Muslim zone has all manner of religious and cultural rules  to limit women’s property ownership.  Most residents are of Somali origin.  'We  often train women on what Islam provides for them with respect to property  rights.  Men have used religion as a tool to deprive women of their rights,'  Hubbie told IPS in a telephonic interview. Womankind Kenya uses religious texts, the constitution as well as  international charters advocating for women’s rights to educate women on  the ground.  She adds that cases of discrimination against women are  common but that affected women do not take any steps out of fear of being  stigmatised. 'Girls never get an equal share of their parents’ property.  It is a worrying  trend here.  Whenever a case arises, a council of men will sit to settle it and in  the end rule in men’s favour,' Hubbie said. Gender and human rights advocates believe that if women enjoyed equal  property rights they could change the social landscape for the better.  