Deforestation rates have slowed in Brazil and elsewhere in  expectation of a windfall of green gold from billions of  dollars of carbon credits being mobilised for climate  protection, some experts believe. Next week, at the United Nations climate conference in  Cancun, Mexico, the final details of a new international  market for buying and selling carbon rights to forests will  be under intense negotiation by 200 countries. This new financial tool called REDD (Reduced Emissions from  Deforestation and Degradation) is widely touted as the only  way to mobilise $10 to $30 billion annually to halt  deforestation, which contributes 15 to 20 percent of global  greenhouse gas emissions.  Deforestation is also the primary  driver of species extinctions and ecosystem destruction. Under REDD, industrialised countries can offset their own  emissions by paying to maintain forests in tropical regions.   Forest owners offer carbon credits on an open market and a  steel, cement or coal-fired power company in the developed  world purchases those credits in lieu of reducing their own  carbon emissions.  It would also require a mandatory  emissions reduction by developed countries. Forests absorb carbon dioxide (CO2) during photosynthesis,  reducing the amount in the atmosphere and helping cool the  Earth.  When a forest is cut, not only is this carbon  absorption or sequestration function lost, but most of the  carbon the forest had been storing is released - even if the  timber is used for long-lasting products like furniture. In theory, REDD saves the forest, protects biodiversity,  reduces climate-warming carbon emissions and compensates  local people.  Win, win, win, win.  In theory. Natural forests are still not protected under REDD, or even  the enhanced REDD+, which emphasises protecting  biodiversity, says Peg Putt of the Wilderness Society, a  U. S. -based conservation group. 'Safeguards to ensure intact forest systems are fully  protected are not yet part of the understanding around  REDD,' Putt told IPS earlier this month at the 10th  Conference of the Parties to the Convention on Biological  Diversity (CBD) in Nagoya, Japan. 'Many countries including the European Union and Canada  define their industrial logging as sustainable forest  management,' she said. Problems and complications aboundIntense debate persists about how to define a forest.   Currently, if a region has 10 percent or more tree cover -  10 hectares of trees in a 100 hectare block - the entire  block is considered a forest, says Toshinori Okuda of  Japan's Hiroshima University. Many countries want plantation forests to be eligible for  credits but don't want to be penalised if they cut down  existing forests to grow plantations.  Few other species can  live in plantation forests so they are essentially green  deserts in terms of biodiversity. On the ground, simply figuring out how much carbon is in a  particular forest, the amount being sequestered as the  forest grows, and for how long is not easy or cheap.   There  will be reporting requirements, land use negotiations and  the costs of ongoing monitoring and forest management, notes  Okuda.  'The revenue from carbon credits won't be enough to pay for  this to be done properly,' Okuda told IPS. 'The only way to cover the costs is for additional payments  for ecosystem services that natural forests provide,' he  said. Forests provide a number of services, including producing  oxygen, cleaning and filtering water, preventing flooding,  providing habitat and food for many species and more.  But  how to value those services has yet to be determined, he  says. Forests are rarely empty of people.  Hundreds of millions  have formal and informal rights to one-third to one-half of  the world's remaining forests.   'National or state-level  agreements usually ignore the views of local people,' says  Imam Basuki of the Indonesia-based Centre for International  Forestry Research (CIFOR). 'Conservation and changes in land use must fit the needs of  local people,' Basuki told IPS. Forests aren't just sticks of carbon or lumber, they are  sacred places where biodiversity is essential for the  survival of local communities.  On the islands of Borneo, the  forest communities in Malinau identified 2,000 different  species of plants of which 1,400 were used regularly, he  said.  Some species were considered irreplaceable and could  not be obtained elsewhere. 'Any REDD projects have to work with local people and not  push them off their land,' Basuki said. However, many local people do not have formal land titles.   Without strong legal protections, rules and enforcement, the  billions of dollars in REDD monies could create a tidal wave  of land grabbing and evictions.  And even if land tenure  issues are handled properly, any company buying carbon  credits will want strong guarantees that their 'carbon  investments' in a forest are protected.  That may mean local  people are banned from their forests, no longer able to  collect firewood, hunt or grow crops in forest openings. Meanwhile, the worst rates of deforestation continue to be  in Asia, particularly in Borneo and Sumatra with the highest  rates in New Guinea, says Ferry Silk of the Xishuangbanna  Tropical Botanical Garden, Yunnan China.  Asia also has the  highest species extinction rates, with 50 percent of the  mammals and 60 percent of the fish at risk, Silk says. 'How much forest will be lost while we wait for REDD?'  wonders Michael Sweatman of the WILD Foundation, a U. S. - based conservation group pioneering the concept that one  half of the planet needs protection to ensure a stable  climate and save ecosystems for future generations. Sweatman thinks ironing out the messy details for a global  deal on REDD could be 10 years away.  He's not waiting and is  calling for an interim mechanism to fund qualified projects  in tropical forests within existing conservation areas or  lands surrounding or connecting them.  'The projects would be community-driven.  The important thing  is bring funding to local communities to protect their  vulnerable forests,' he told IPS. Conservation costs money both directly and in terms of  foregone revenue such as from logging.  Sweatman's Interim  Mechanism to Protect Tropical Forests would access finance  in the voluntary carbon market and use a science-based  streamlined methodology to set a standard, do its carbon  accounting as well as training local people to monitor and  manage their forest. 'This mechanism would be a bridge to REDD.  We can't wait any  longer.  We've got to get started now. '