Though there is widespread acknowledgement that the ambitions  for this year's climate change conference are considerably  lower than for last year's, the U. N.  and other groups say even  the deal struck a year ago will not go far enough to stop  climate change. When the parties to the U. N. 's Framework Convention on  Climate Change meet in Cancún beginning Nov.  29, it will be  with a slightly lower profile than last year's highly  anticipated and much-hyped conference in Copenhagen. But they will be trying to continue the work undertaken  there, which included a nonbinding Copenhagen Accord whereby  some of the countries which emit the most greenhouse gases  agreed to reduce those emissions. On Tuesday, the U. N.  Environment Programme released a report  that concluded those reductions, even if fully met, are only  60 percent of the reductions needed to keep global  temperatures from rising by more than two degrees Celsius  above preindustrial levels, which scientists — and the  accord — say is necessary to prevent catastrophe. Negotiators in Cancún will try to bridge that remaining 40  percent — or at least start to — among other scaled-back  objectives. 'The challenge before us in Cancún and the one that we have  been, frankly, focused on all year is to find a way to build  on the progress made last year in the Copenhagen Accord,'  the U. S.  Special Envoy for Climate Change Todd Stern said  Monday. 'It is now widely understood that a legal treaty this year  is not in the cards,' said Stern.  The U. S. , he said, will be  seeking a 'balanced package of decisions' on financing and  on mitigation targets or actions. In order to lay the groundwork for an eventual treaty, he  said there is a 'vision of progress within our reach' that  would start with decisions on mitigation commitments, a  green fund, transparency and technology assistance. This agenda for Cancún would be broader than the focus on  only financial and technological assistance on which other  countries have said they would focus. 'We need to be making concrete progress now' toward an  eventual legally binding treaty, Stern said.  However, he  reiterated Washington's position that it would not be ready  to sign a treaty unless it includes mitigation commitments  from China and other emerging economies, adding, 'We just  don’t see this happening soon. 'China joined with India, Brazil, South Africa and the U. S.   to create last year's accord at the Copenhagen summit.   Together with other countries that later submitted emissions  reductions targets under the agreement, countries  representing 80 percent of global greenhouse gas emissions  have pledged reductions. For now, emissions are continuing to rise.  A study published  Monday in the journal Nature Geoscience predicts carbon  dioxide emissions will reach a record high this year, as a  slight decline due to the economic and financial crisis will  be offset by increases in emissions from developing  countries, most notably China and India. Monday, Stern noted that emissions from the industrialised  world have largely leveled off and that most of the new  growth in emissions numbers is coming from emerging  economies in the developing world. It is estimated that in order for the two-degree target to  not be exceeded this century, however, global emissions will  have to peak in the next 10 years.  This means the amount of  greenhouse gases emitted each year will, by 2020, have to  come down to 44 gigatonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent — or  44 times the annual emissions of international aviation and  shipping activities. In 2009, total global emissions were estimated to be about  48 gigatonnes, and UNEP says that full implementation of the  accord pledges would result in, at best, 49 gigatonnes of  emissions in 2020. In a worst-case scenario, with lax accounting requirements  and low political will to stick to the spirit of the accord,  emissions could rise to 53 gigatonnes. This 'gigatonne gap' means there are still plenty of  commitments and strengthening of commitments that need to be  made at Cancún and beyond, the scientists behind UNEP's  report said Tuesday. 'Negotiators need to come to Cancún armed with a commitment  to robust accounting rules and to move ahead with ambitious  emission reduction pledges to close the gap between what‘s  needed and where we‘re currently headed,' said Kelly Levin,  a senior associate at the Washington-based World Resources  Institute and a lead author on the report, which was jointly  researched by 30 scientists at climate modeling centres and  institutes on four continents. But they say the gap is not too big to be closed.  If the  accord did not exist, emissions would be expected to rise to  56 gigatonnes in 2020, and, says UNEP, 60 percent means  there is progress toward keeping temperatures below two  percent.  With success at future meetings, that progress  might reach 100 percent, they hope. 'The results indicate that the U. N.  meeting in Copenhagen  could prove to have been more of a success than a failure if  all the commitments, intentions and funding, including fully  supporting the pledges of developing economies, are met,'  said Achim Steiner, UNEP's executive director. The remaining gap, he said, might be bridged by further  commitments from both rich and poor countries and actions on  pollutants such as methane, black carbon and the burning of  biomass and animal wastes. 