While many U. S.  residents prepare for their annual  Thanksgiving feast Thursday, one in six are at risk of hunger  — including a quarter of all children in the country. Globally, 925 million people, or a little less than 15  percent of the world population, is undernourished.   Ironically, Washington's efforts to alleviate hunger abroad  may be more successful than at home, analysts say. The U. S.  Department of Agriculture's estimate last week that  49 million U. S.  residents, including 17 million children,  lacked adequate food at some point during 2009 came about a  week before the annual post-harvest celebration of  Thanksgiving, during which many U. S.  kitchens are filled  with the bounties expected by residents of such a wealthy  country.  But not everyone can expect those bounties, it  turns out. The number of 'food insecure' households in the U. S.  jumped  in 2008 due to the economic crisis, but failed to come back  down in 2009. To address this persistent problem, the U. S.  government has  nutrition assistance programmes, and those were generally  expanded in the wake of the economic crisis.  They seem to  have worked over the past couple years. Even though unemployment rose from just under nine million  to over 14 million between 2008 and 2009, food insecurity  did not increase, points out Kevin Concannon, U. S.  under- secretary for food, nutrition and consumer services.  These numbers, he says, 'are very supportive of the  experience that we are hearing across the country that the  15 federal nutrition assistance programmes are indeed doing  what they are intended to do, and that is respond to people.   We have seen the strengths of these programmes in action. 'But as Washington's attention has turned to reducing the  federal debt, this nutrition safety net is once again being  slimmed down. The Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Programme, formerly  called the Food Stamp Programme, for instance, is meant to  prevent to allow the poorest to afford food even when it is  too expensive for them.  It was expanded through economic  stimulus funding, but now faces cutbacks. Some of those cuts are because money will go to other  nutrition assistance programmes, but some is simply because  of an emphasis of politics. Leading up to the U. S.  Congressional elections earlier this  month, 'both sides [Republicans and Democrats] were  convinced that any poverty-related discussion would scare  away middle-class voters, ignoring the reality that tens of  millions of Americans, formerly solidly middle-class, were  teetering on the edge of poverty and hunger themselves,'  says Joel Berg, executive director of the New York City  Coalition Against Hunger. Meanwhile, reauthorisation of the Child Nutrition Act, which  would provide funding for school meals programmes, has yet  to be approved by Congress. President Barack Obama has also called for 400 million  dollars to be invested in expanding access to fresh, healthy  food in underserved, traditionally poor neighbourhoods —  sometimes called 'food deserts', where convenience stores  and fast food restaurants are often the only food options  nearby. For now, though, the pockets of low-income communities  without adequate food that have existed for decades still  persist. Fighting hunger abroadNeedless to say, if hunger cannot even be eliminated in the  U. S. , the picture is far more dire overseas.  The U. N.  says  that 925 million people will suffer chronic hunger this  year, down from 2009's one billion, but still the second  largest number on record. A report released Monday by the NGO Bread for the World,  though, says that progress against this daunting challenge  is possible, and that a large part of that progress should  be the U. S. 's Feed the Future initiative. Feed the Future will funnel 3. 5 billion dollars over three  years to overseas development assistance focused on  agriculture. It reverses what Rajiv Shah, administrator of the U. S.   Agency for International Development (USAID), calls the  'decades-long neglect of agriculture-led development'. Calling the programme the most important development  strategy to come out of Washington in 50 years, Shah said  Monday that Bread for the World's report 'aptly reminds us  that in order to tackle the root causes of hunger and  malnutrition, we need to invest in smallholder farmers and  focus on integrating nutrition and agriculture development  through a country-led approach. 'Last week, Shah and U. S.  Secretary of State Hillary Clinton  announced that Feed the Future would be overseen by USAID  and, Monday, Shah announced a Bureau of Food Security within  the agency to manage the initiative. The U. S. 's recent increased focus on food security abroad is  thought to be in reaction to the food price crisis of 2007- 08, after which many governments realised they had been  underinvesting in agriculture. 'The food price crisis was a wakeup call.  It started a new  global conversation about hunger, malnutrition and food  security,' said Asma Lateef, director of Bread for the  World.  'Two years later, with U. S.  leadership, there is a  renewed focus on smallholder agriculture and reversing  decades of neglect - just as we enter a new period of rising  food prices. ' The U. N.  says that two-thirds of the world's hungry are in  just seven countries, but it is clear there are significant  pockets of undernourishment everywhere — even in the United  States. 