On Nov.  29, the 190-member Conference of Parties (COP) will  flock to the Moon Palace Hotel, an all-inclusive luxury  coastal resort in Cancún, Mexico, to discuss governments'  progress on climate change. The 16th COP session comes barely a year after the 2009  December meeting in Copenhagen, now widely considered a  massive diplomatic failure. Amidst mounting global panic over states' consistent  inability to forge an adequate alternative to the nearly- expired Kyoto Protocol, the meeting in Cancún is  foreshadowed by a deep pessimism after what transpired in  Denmark last year. Nigel Purvis, a senior fellow at the German Marshall Fund of  the United States, blasted the feeble 'Copenhagen Accord'  which has no power to hold countries accountable to their  never-ending, yet largely empty promises on Green Funds and  donations to the Least Developed Countries (LDCs). 'Global climate talks have begun to resemble a bad soap  opera,' Purvis said, in an essay entitled 'Cancún and the  End of Climate Diplomacy'.  'They seem to never end, yet  seldom change and at times bear little resemblance to  reality.  This is why climate diplomacy as we know it has  lost its relevance. 'Earlier this month, the U. N.  secretary-general's High-level  Advisory Group on Climate Change Financing released its  annual report, which stated unequivocally that a minimum of  $100 billion annually must be mobilised towards climate  actions in developing countries. Norwegian Prime Minister Jens Stoltenberg, one of the  report's co-authors, stressed that, 'Climate finance is not  about funding, but about burden sharing. ' He reiterated that  without solid agreements from member states, climate action  will stagnate, particularly in the LDCs. Speaking on behalf of the African member-states, Ethiopian  Prime Minister Meles Zenawi chastised wealthy counties for  shying away from binding agreements, adding that Africa can  no longer afford, nor tolerate, to bear the brunt of  climate-caused disasters that they have done the least to  cause. 'This report can be used for an ambitious deal, or a miserly  one,' Zenawi told the press.  'It might even be abandoned on  the desk of a bureaucrat.  But we, as Africans, refuse to  give up. 'While the heated debate blazes on, climate-caused  catastrophes continue to proliferate into every political  and economic realm imaginable. On Nov.  11, the permanent mission of the Marshall Islands  hosted an informal discussion on the particular threat of  climate change for Small Island Developing States (SIDS). John Silk, minister of foreign affairs for the Marshall  Islands, reminded the audience that SIDS' unique condition  must be studied not only by those directly affected but by  the whole world, for it poses broad questions about  existence, security and statehood. Michael Gerrard, director of the Center for Climate Change  Law, was also present at the discussion.  At the behest of  the mission of the Marshall Islands, Gerrard, along with his  colleagues at the Columbia Law School, are hosting a  conference in 2011 on the severe legal implications of  climate-displaced people of island nations due to rising sea  levels. Among the issues to be covered, according to Gerrard, are  statelessness; maritime governance in the event of  statelessness (for example: regulation of fishing rights);  the legal condition of displaced people who are resettled;  the practicalities of resettlement; and the applicability of  existing legal theories and institutions to their plight. Gerrard also stressed that while many countries have ceased  to exist due to wars, or political agreements, no country  has ever disappeared entirely because all of its territory  ceased to exist above the waters. 'The existing international agreements are clearly not  adequate to mitigate climate change to the extent  necessary,' Gerrard told IPS, 'or to cope with the disasters  that climate change will cause. ''Had a comprehensive agreement been reached in Copenhagen,  the world might have made substantial progress in the  direction of necessary action,' he added. Gerrard also highlighted the dangers of the fusion between  political imperatives and corporate incentives. 'The United States, for example, once opened its borders to  those fleeing religious and political persecution,' he told  IPS.  'In recent years, however, the U. S.  has become much  less receptive to immigration.  An international agreement  for resettling climate-displaced people, in which each major  emitting country agreed to take in a share, could improve  matters, but even that is no guarantee of success. ''Law in the United States is becoming more and more amenable  to corporate campaigns,' he added. While the Columbia Law School struggles to find a mere  $50,000 conference budget, millions are being spent on  'climate denial' campaigns, emphasising Gerrard's  observations on corporate influence. According to a report released by Greenpeace International  earlier this year, the little-known private corporation Koch  Industries has been fuelling a propaganda movement denying  the scientific basis of climate change.  According to the  report, a staggering $30 million has been spent on the  campaign every year. At a press briefing on COP 16 earlier this week, Robert Orr,  assistant secretary-general for policy planning in Cancún,  dismissed the idea that the climate denial campaign is a  force to be reckoned with. 'The notion that climate change is not happening or not  caused by human behaviour has no basis in science,' Orr  said, 'and the secretary-general has taken a firm stand on  this from the start. ''We have asked the IPCC [Intergovernmental Panel on Climate  Change] to really tighten up its systems such that questions  about the science cannot be asked in the future,' he added. Regardless of these somewhat negligible details, the  impending crisis looms over Mexico.  If Copenhagen was billed  as the 'last chance to save the planet', many worry that  Cancún's rating is fated to be even worse. 