Cactus, bushes, flowers and countless other plants are taken out of Chile daily to  be studied, improved, marketed and patented.  Due to the lack of regulations,  the country can only stand by and watch them go. 'The departure or flight of biological material from Chile occurs daily and  there is no legal framework to regulate it,' Pedro León, an expert with the  Ministry of Agriculture's research institute, INIA, told Tierramérica. More than 11 percent of Chile's native flora species are sold abroad as seeds  or nursery plants, with no payment of royalties.  This situation involves at  least 586 species and 6. 5 percent face extinction, according to a study  published in March in the INIA journal Tierra Adentro. Compared to other Latin American countries, like Brazil, Ecuador and Peru,  Chile does not have a big variety of native plant species: about 5,200.  But a  great number -- about 2,500 -- are endemic to Chile alone, given the  country's relative geographic isolation, with the long Pacific Ocean coast to  the west and the Andes Mountains to the east.  'That means they have unique chemical compounds,' for example, that make  them resistant to drought or cold, María Isabel Manzur, of the non- governmental Sustainable Societies Foundation, told Tierramérica. About 30 percent of Chilean flora has known or potential uses as food,  medicine, forage crops or fuel. Among the plants that INIA identified as being sold in other countries, there  are cactus species of the Copiapoa genus, the lion's claw flower (Leontochir  ovallei) and glory-of-the-sun flower (Leucocoryne). The 'Chilean guava' (Ungi molinae), a bush whose berries have food, cosmetic  and medicinal uses, is today grown in Australia and New Zealand, although  INIA has developed and patented two improved varieties in Chile. A well-known case is that of a microorganism, Streptomyces hygroscopicus,  discovered in the 1960s on Easter Island by Canadian researchers.  From it,  scientists have extracted rapamycin, which has antibiotic, antifungal,  immuno-suppressor and anti-ageing properties. 'The seeds leave the country because there are people or institutions that sell  them overseas to meet the demands of international seed companies, or  nurseries or individual collectors,' said León, who is in charge of INIA's Vicuña  Experiment Centre Seed Bank. The authority to regulate access to a country's genetic resources lies with the  government and should be subject to national legislation, states the  Convention on Biological Diversity, signed in 1992 and ratified by Chile in  1995. The Convention also promotes the fair and equitable distribution of benefits  arising from the use of those resources, especially among rural dwellers and  indigenous communities, who have amassed knowledge about the properties  of plants, animals and even microorganisms. But it has taken the Convention's member countries 18 years to adopt a  specific protocol on genetic resources. And 15 years after ratifying the treaty, Chile has yet to draft legislation on the  matter.  Because no laws are being violated, León prefers to talk about the  'flight' of genetic material instead of 'biopiracy,' as the practice is also widely  known.  The flowers of the genus Alstroemeria, like the lily of the Incas, are another  example of this process.  Several wild species were taken from Chile to the  Netherlands, where they were improved through crossbreeding -- and now  the Netherlands is an exporter of the flower. Due to excessive extraction from their natural habitat, some plant species  now face extinction, like cactus species native to Chile's northern coastal  desert.  The true scope of the problem is unknown because only three of  Chile's 15 regions have 'red books' tracking the conservation status of their  flora and fauna. INIA, meanwhile, has four germplasm banks, which collect seeds, tissue  cultures or plant collections that hold the genetic material of each species.   The institute is opening a fifth site to preserve different Chilean varieties of  the potato. According to León, Chile maintains about 60 percent of its agricultural  diversity and 20 percent of native flora, with the goal to reach 45 percent by  2020.  But to protect a plant sample can cost 2,000 to 3,000 dollars, and  preservation of fruit species is only in its initial stages.  In order to preserve the array of species, INIA wants people or institutions to  report when they are transferring genetic materials abroad.  Botanical gardens,  for example, sign 'access contracts. ' But most biological samples leave the country with only a certificate from the  Agricultural and Livestock Service, which states they are free of disease or  pests. In the last few years, Manzur, of the Sustainable Societies Foundation, has  seen several drafts of laws aimed at regulating access to genetic resources.   'But none of them has reached port because there is no consensus and  because one government term ends and the next one has different priorities,'  she said. Meanwhile, Brazil's law on biodiversity is 'quite strict,' according to experts.   But while it prevents genetic materials from leaving the country, it also creates  obstacles for research within the country.  Costa Rica and the Andean  Community (Bolivia, Colombia, Peru and Ecuador) have similar regulations. The Nagoya Protocol on Access to Genetic Resources and the Fair and  Equitable Sharing of Benefits Arising from Their Utilisation, was agreed Oct.   29 in the Japanese city during the latest meeting of the Convention on  Biological Diversity.  It could be the push Chile needs to fill the legal void,  according to Manzur. 'Once and for all we have to appreciate the value of our natural wealth,  designate the necessary resources to conduct an inventory, and to conserve  them and utilise them in a sustainable way,' said INIA's León. 'Chile participated in the Nagoya Protocol negotiations.  The final text will be  analysed by the Executive branch's institutions before determining whether to  sign it,' a source from the Foreign Ministry told Tierramérica. The Nagoya Protocol will be open for signatures from member countries from  Feb.  2, 2011 to Feb.  1, 2012, and will enter into force once 50 countries have  ratified it. According to the Ministry source, the government is again considering 'a law  on this matter. '*This story is part of a series of features on biodiversity by Inter Press Service  (IPS), CGIAR/Biodiversity International, International Federation of  Environmental Journalists (IFEJ), and the United Nations Environment  Programme/Convention on Biological Diversity (UNEP/CBD) -- all members of  the Alliance of Communicators for Sustainable Development  (www. complusalliance. org).  