The World Ski Cup for women last weekend was organised in Bulgaria at a ski  resort whose development is partially illegal, and which is damaging a world  heritage site. A report published by the Save Pirin Coalition and endorsed by several  environmental organisations in Bulgaria claims that the development of the  Bansko Ski Zone has severely damaged the Pirin National Park, one of the two  United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organisation (UNESCO)  world heritage sites located in Bulgaria.  Bansko is a recently expanded and  modernised ski resort in south-western Bulgaria, 160 km from capital Sofia  in the Pirin mountains.  Measurements made by experts from Save Pirin, and information provided by  the management of the Pirin Park show that construction has been carried  out on 247 hectares of land instead of the 99 hectares for which the  developers received authorisation from the Bulgarian Ministry of Environment  and Water in 2001.  Furthermore, Save Pirin claims that environmental impact  assessment agreements have been breached.  The authors of the report argue that around 1,000 hectares have been  modified for construction of ski slopes and associated transport and living  infrastructure.  Intense excavation and massive deforestation have led to the  washing away of soil layers and the emergence of huge crevices.  Natural  habitat has been fragmented, and species like the brown bear have been  driven from their usual locations.  Asked whether they had looked into environmentalists' claims of illegalities  when choosing Bansko as a location for the world cup, International Ski  Federation (FIS) representative Riika Rakic told IPS that 'the FIS helped the  Bulgarian Ski Association and the local organisers at the resort engage an  environmental advisor to assess the situation and develop long-term  strategies in this area. ' Suspicions of past illegalities did not affect the choice of location because  'FIS relies on its members to ensure that they respect and comply with all  national regulations and legislations in all their activities. 'The development has been controversial for some time.  The European Bank  for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD) was earlier an investor in Bansko;  it owned a share in the Bulgarian First Investment Bank, the institution which  coordinated all investments in Bansko.  But after complaints from  environmentalists and from UNESCO, EBRD sold its share in the First  Investment Bank in December 2006.  The Bulgarian Ski Association, the FIS partner in charge of the Bansko event,  is run by Tseko Minev, who is also the main shareholder in the Bulgarian First  Investment Bank.  Minev, who was in 2007 the third richest man in Bulgaria, has repeatedly  expressed support for development of another ski resort in the Vitosha  National Park, close to capital Sofia.  Bulgaria hopes to organise the Winter  Olympics in the next decade, and Vitosha would be needed to complement  the facilities in Bansko.  Development of the Vitosha Ski resort has been marred by controversy from  the outset.  'The Vitosha Ski Company is 90 percent owned by an offshore  company, Elora Management Ltd, registered on the British Virgin Islands, and  one of the serious problems is that it is completely unclear who is behind the  company and what is the source of the money,' Katerina Rakovska from the  World Wildlife Fund Danube Carpathian Programme (WWFDCP) told IPS.  'As we  all know, lack of transparency is the mother of corruption. ' As the skiers in the Friday race were sliding down the slopes of Bansko, the  centre of Sofia was filling up with people protesting the decision to fire three  directors of national parks (Vitosha, Strandja and Vrachanski Balkan).  On  Friday morning, Bulgarian media had quoted an opposition claim that the  directors would be fired soon because of their resistance to construction in  the parks. Many Bulgarians were excited over the skiing event, in the categories of  downhill and Super G (super-giant) in the 2009 FIS Alpine Ski World Cup; the  country has not been on the world ski cups schedule since 1984.  The  organisation of the cup was indication that the country is able to offer up to  standard tourism and sports facilities.  Tourism has traditionally played a major role in Bulgarian development.   Before 1989, the Black Sea coast was a popular destination for summer  tourists from countries east of the Berlin Wall, gaining it the nickname 'the  Red Riviera'.  Post-socialist governments have continued to focus on tourism  infrastructure development, both on the coast and in the mountains.  With  prices still low for Western tourists, Bulgaria was able to attract close to two  million foreign visitors in just the first half of 2008 (Bulgaria's own population  is seven million).  The cash inflows from the tourism industry are certainly welcome for  Bulgaria, the poorest country in the European Union.  Bulgarians themselves  enjoy the new opportunities for sports and entertainment, although prices in  resorts like Bansko are too high for many. The Bulgarian Ski Federation is currently training 3,000 Bulgarian children  free of charge, in an attempt to popularise the sport and breed future  champions.  No Bulgarian woman has yet won a World Cup event. But Bulgarian environmentalists are now worried by the environmental cost of  these plans.  Far from trying to contain the damage, they fear developers in  Bansko will continue to expand their reach inside the National Parks.  