Residents in the communities around Trinityville in the  eastern parish of St.  Thomas, Jamaica are used to being  stranded for several days at a time. Surrounded by flood plains and numerous tributaries and  streams, they can do little to prevent flooding.  But the  people had a plan to minimise the effects of landslides on  their communities and to pre-position equipment and relief  supplies for those periods of separation. Head of the St.  Thomas Environmental Protection Association  (STEPA) Terrence Cover told IPS that Trinityville and the  five outlining communities situated in the shadows of  Jamaica's highest peak in the Blue Mountains are affected  several times a year by heavy rainfall as well as  hurricanes.  Landslides caused by the denuded hillsides and frequent  flooding result in regular stranding and impact the  livelihoods of the residents.  More than 1,750 miles away in Wageningen, a coastal town in  Suriname's northwest, residents too had a plan.  For several  years, more than 100 homes in the town were inundated by  floodwaters every time heavy rains fell in the Amazon.  In  February, they installed newly mended floodgates that will  once again protect the town.  Built in 1949 in the low-lying wetlands along the banks of  the Nickeri River, Wageningen was protected by a system of  dykes and sluice (flood) gates that prevented flooding  during the rainy season and from the river when water levels  were high. Over time, however, the sluice gates and dykes fell into  disrepair and remained permanently open, leaving the 6,000  residents vulnerable to flooding from the sea and the river.  With grants of between $24,000 and $73,000, communities from  Suriname on the South American continent to Jamaica in the  north and Barbados at the eastern end of the Caribbean Sea  are bolstering their ability to withstand natural disasters. The Canada Caribbean Disaster Risk Management Fund (CCDRMF)  is helping poor communities to design and implement disaster  risk reduction projects through community self-help and  partnerships. The CCDRMF is a component of the government of Canada's  regional Caribbean Disaster Risk Management Programme.  It  was designed to support non-governmental organisations and  government agencies within CARICOM (Caribbean Community) in  carrying out small-scale community projects to reduce the  risks from the many natural hazards affecting the region  such as floods, droughts, storms, and hurricanes.  Even as the Caribbean experiences more frequent extreme  weather-related events possibly resulting from climate  change, Fund coordinator Leslie Walling is confident that  the project is making a difference. 'It is becoming clearer that the first steps to climate  change adaptation must be adaptation to the current climatic  extremes,' he told IPS.  The CCDRM Fund targets poor communities like Trinityville  and the outlying communities of Danvers Pen, Font Hill,  Mounts Lebanus and Vernon and Somerset that are the most  vulnerable, and prone to natural disasters.  Most of the residents here are subsistence farmers, making a  living cultivating their tiny plots, tending one or two  heads of cattle, a few goats or chickens or other small  animals. Despite the need, the Trinityville project has stalled  because it lacks the technical expertise required to design  the storage facility.  The absence of technical expertise is  a recurring theme in projects submitted to the Fund by  Jamaican communities because most require infrastructural  work.  In fact, over the years several development projects have  fallen by the wayside.  In recent times, the problem is made  more difficult because state agencies - which have been  mandated to earn their keep - are reluctant to provide  technical expertise without direct access to the donor  funds. In addition, allocations for community disaster risk  management projects are provided only in response to impacts  and donors do not provide funding for staff or technical  work.  It is a common belief that the absence of a system to track  the billions of dollars being spent each year in adaptation  and recovery may be at fault, a position supported by Dr.   Barbara Carby, head of the Disaster Risk Reduction Centre at  the University of the West Indies. A regional disaster management expert and former head of  Jamaica's national response agency, Dr.  Carby forwards the  idea that investments in adaptation measures are sidelined  because 'the results of these investments are not usually  seen for many years until a disaster occurs'. The inability of technical experts to quantify the amounts  spent on disaster risk reduction programmes, Dr.  Carby said,  seem to have made developers and the political directorate  reluctant to invest in infrastructure that will 'stand up'  to future hazards. In other parts of the region, partnerships between  government agencies, charities and professional groups are  leading to many successes.  In St.  Vincent, the Rainbow Radio League, a group of  independent radio operators worked with government and other  groups to create an emergency communications network linking  nine vulnerable communities to critical agencies and  institutions including the neighbouring islands of  Martinique, Dominica, Grenada and St.  Lucia.  Although incomplete when Hurricane Tomas pummeled the  Windward Islands in late October, the system was called into  service when gale force winds disconnected the electricity  and telephone services, project coordinator Donald De Riggs  said.  Retrofitted with solar panels and a wind turbine, the  Rainbow Radio League provided invaluable communication  linkages between affected communities.  Back in Wageningen, with the two sluice gates restored to  full working order, the community is not only safer but has  now partnered with government to create a special technical  department to maintain and repair sluice gates around the  district.  The CCDRM Fund has also developed close working  relationships with regional governments, charities,  community groups and the local response agencies to ease the  challenges associated with donor funding.  Walling credits the regional societies of the Red Cross for  many of Fund's successes.  The Red Cross's partnerships with  communities such as Wageningen have helped to identify and  prioritise the natural hazard risks in countries across the  region.  The charity is enhancing awareness and risk  management capacities in communities across the region  through a United Nations funded Community Vulnerability and  Capacity Assessment (VCA) survey.  On the southeastern coast of Dominica, residents of the twin  communities of Morne Jaune and Riviere Cyrique worked in  collaboration with the national disaster office and the  Ministry of Works to refurbish and establish an emergency  shelter.  One of the few certified disaster shelters in the  region, the Tere Yam Community Shelter now serves the 592  villagers and provides space for dozens of other community  activities.  Walling's aim is to build technical capacities within  beneficiary communities, alongside the 80 projects slated  for funding between the 2008 start and when it ends in 2015.   With 24 projects in various stages of implementation and  another 39 eligible for funding, the CCDRM Fund manager is  seeking further collaboration to fulfill the project's  mandate. 'If you can't cope with the current hurricane and extreme  rainfall now, then you won't be able to cope with what is to  come,' Walling said. *This IPS story is part of a series supported by the Climate  and Development Knowledge Network - http://www. cdkn. org. 