India’s first-ever major scientific assessment of its climate  change scenario by the 2030s, released in November, has the  report’s scientists rooting for the government to take  concrete action.    Scientists involved in the work are now saying the job of  taking action against the projections and warnings made so  far is in government hands.     'It is the job of scientists to forewarn and inform,'  says Dr N H Ravindranath, one of the authors of this new  report brought out by India’s environment ministry and also  a lead author of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate  Change (IPCC) 4th assessment report in 2007.  Ravindranath is  from the premier Indian Institute of Science, based here in  Bangalore.    The Indian report was issued in the run-up to the series  of United Nations meetings around climate change to be held  in Cancun, Mexico, from Nov.  29-Dec. 10, 2010.    The report was prepared for the environment ministry by  the Indian National Network for Climate Change Assessment  (INCCA), which comprises 120 national research and  scientific institutions and more than 220 scientists.    Using a Hadley Centre Regional Climate Model version 3  (HAD RM 3), it brought out scenarios in agriculture, water,  natural ecosystems and biodiversity in the north, south,  west and on India’s coasts, bordering over three-quarters of  this South Asian country’s landmass.    The report, thus called a ‘4x4’ assessment, forecasts an  overall temperature warming of 1. 7 degrees to 2 degrees  Centigrade for India, sea-level rise at 1. 33 millimetres per  year and likely to rise further, with cyclonic intensity  increasing even while their frequency declines.     Interestingly, fish yields of certain species such as  sardines and mackerel are slated to rise in warming  temperatures, it adds.    But fishermen on India’s east coast say the forecast of  increased yields of some fish, such as mackerel, sounds  unlikely.     'The west coast might have more mackerel, the eastern  coastline faces severe marine pollution,' says Arjilli Dasu,  executive secretary of the Vishakhapatnam-based District  Fishermen’s Youth Welfare Association.  ' The eastern coast  has no ecological conservation measures, such as mangrove  regeneration, in place.  We expect, at the current  conditions, that the sea will ingress at least 10 to 15  metres into the villages by 2020 itself. '   Dasu’s organisation works with fishing communities along  a 100-km stretch of the coastline in Andhra Pradesh on  India’s eastern seafront.     The warmer atmosphere will also be good for irrigated  rice, as it tends to increase with carbon dioxide  fertilisation, says the report.    However, rainfed agriculture, which provides livelihood  for the majority of India’s farmers, will suffer, and there  will be more stress on livestock and on milk productivity.     Water yield is projected to increase in the Himalayan  region, but will be variable in the Western Ghats and along  the coastline, it adds.    The Keystone Foundation, which works with tribal  communities, biodiversity and livelihood in the Western  Ghats, notes the report’s findings on rainfall and rainfed  agriculture.  ' We apprehend an accentuated erraticity in the  Western Ghats’ plantation (tea) sector, in small agriculture  and also high flooding', says foundation director Pratim  Roy.    'For instance', says Roy, ' this year there was very poor  productivity in any seasonable crop, be it in agriculture,  beekeeping or others, because flowering and the rains have  both come together, instead of in its usual periodicity.  So  an entire food basket collapsed this year. '   'As you now see, the report underlines a very high impact  in highland areas,' Roy told IPS on the telephone from  Ootacamund, hill capital of the Western Ghats.    The Western Ghats, a beautiful hill-region running  parallel to the west coast in peninsular India and  traversing six states, will be impacted greatly by a rise in  temperature by as much as 4. 5 degrees Centigrade.  It is  recognised as a global biodiversity hotspot.    Having some of the finest examples of moist deciduous and  tropical forests, 18 of the 54 forest grids in this area are  projected to change by the 2030s, impacting the lives and  livelihoods of a sizeable population in the area.     'A lot of effort has gone into the findings, ' says Prof  Ravindranath.  'The ministry should initiate a plan of clear  action for the forest sections under their control. '   Dr Subodh Sharma from the environment ministry, chief  coordinator of the INCCA report, says action for any  assessment 'lies in the policy-makers’ see'.     Sharma says the report will provide a solid base for  future actions by various government departments.   'I am  thinking on how to take this report forward, but it will  certainly provide an information base for all,' adds Sharma.    'Assessments made at such short timelines are useful, as  they can be used to develop adaptation strategies for a  foreseeable future', Environment Minister Jairam Ramesh says  in the report’s preface.    India has not had any regional scientific climate- assessment in the next 20 years.  All major policies have so  far been driven by global assessments projected for the  2050s.    INCCA’s first report, published in May 2010, was on  greenhouse gas emissions.  That was also the first report by  a developing country on updated data.  Its next report, due  in May 2011, will be on India’s carbon aerosol (black  carbon) programme.  