Governments have moved to ban the commercial fishing of at least two species  of endangered sharks, but the Atlantic bluefin tuna received little protection at  the end of a ten-day intergovernmental meeting here. Greenpeace and other environment groups slammed the International  Commission for the Conservation of Atlantic Tunas (ICCAT) for not taking the  necessary action to protect the bluefin, a victim of overfishing.  'We’re all very disappointed,' said Oliver Knowles, oceans campaigner for  Greenpeace International. 'We would like to suggest that ICCAT take ‘conservation’ out of its name  because they’ve shown that they are not capable of managing tuna stocks in a  sustainable way,' he told IPS at the end of the closed-door meetings at the  conference, from which activists and the media were barred. Environmentalists had called on ICCAT’s 48 members to suspend industrial  fishing of the eastern Atlantic bluefin until sustainable measures were in  place and the species showed signs of recovery.  Alternatively, they had hoped to see a reduction in annual fishing quotas from  the current 13,500 tonnes to 6,000.  ICCAT decided on a slight reduction, to 12,900 tonnes for the year 2011.  This  figure gives the fish about a two-thirds chance of recovery, according to the  Commission, but others say it is not enough to halt the decline in bluefin  stocks, which have plunged by 80 percent since 1970.  'Would you get in an airplane or car if you were told that it had a 30 percent  chance of crashing?' Knowles asked. The 'nominal decrease' in quotas, means that the fish species will 'endure  another season of destructive fishing' and that previously agreed targets for  recovery will be missed, Knowles said. Dr.  Susan Lieberman, director of international policy for the Washington- based Pew Environment Group, told IPS that the new quotas were 'not good  enough' because of all the 'cheating' that takes place in bluefin fishery. 'Despite the information based on sound science that shows how threatened  these species are, and despite all the recent evidence of fraud, laundering and  illegal fishing, Atlantic bluefin tuna once again were denied the protection  they desperately need,' she said.  A recent report by the International Consortium for Investigative Journalists  (ICIJ) said that illegal Bluefin fishing activities between 1998 and 2007  generated some 4 billion dollars for those involved. Environment groups blamed the European Union and France, which hosted  the meeting, for what they say is a failed policy.  Last month, EU Commissioner  for Maritime Affairs and Fisheries Maria Damanaki proposed cutting the  Mediterranean quota of bluefin tuna to 6,000 tonnes, which would have given  the species a greater chance of recovering by 2022, according to  conservationists.  But the EU backtracked on this proposal, saying it was now taking into  consideration the interests of the tuna fishermen.  'This year's ICCAT meeting has produced results which represent a step in the  right direction for sustainable management of bluefin tuna and other species,'  Damanaki said in a statement.  'This is important not just for ICCAT waters  and stocks, but for fisheries management globally, and for the EU as a whole. 'She added that the new agreement had 'allowed the EU to maintain its share  in the fishery, which is good news for our fishermen and industry, and  reflects the leading role the EU has played towards the recovery of this stock. 'French fishermen told local reporters that their livelihoods were at stake if  reductions in quotas were made.  During the meeting, France 'pushed hard' to  not have to pay back in quotas the amounts of tuna it has overfished in the  past.  However, ICCAT decided that the country had to pay back 1,500 tonnes  per year over the next two years, according to Greenpeace. 'The decisions we have to take can sometimes be very hard for the fishing  industry to accept,' Pierre Amilhat, head of the EU delegation, said at the start  of the ICCAT meeting.  'But I know that most fishermen understand that while  conservation may cause hardship in the short term, it is in their long-term  interests to support our work here. 'Environment groups said Japan also went back on promises it had made  earlier this year to ensure bluefin protection at this ICCAT meeting.  The Asian  country imports around 80 percent of bluefin caught in the Mediterranean,  and it had pledged in March to use the Paris meeting to show its commitment  to conservation. Japan’s delegation said the country had suspended products with  'inconsistent information on catching, transferring, caging, harvesting and  exporting', as it tried to implement the Bluefin Catch Documentation Scheme. 'It was a painful task for the Japanese government officials to conduct this  job,' the delegation said.  'We cannot repeat this difficult exercise next year. 'On sharks, ICCAT adopted a proposal that bans retention of the oceanic  whitetip species caught in longline fishing, where lines can stretch for a  hundred miles and contain thousands of hooks that catch fish  indiscriminately.  The decision means that these sharks, easily identifiable because of their  distinctive white-tipped fins, have to be returned to the ocean when they’re  caught.  The same applies to six kinds of hammerhead sharks, except in  subsistence fishing.  'It’s a good, positive step for conservation of these species,' said Matt Rand,  director of global shark conservation for the Pew Environment Group.  'But we  still have a long way to go for dozens of other species. 'Conservationists say that millions of sharks are killed each year mainly for  their fins, which are used in shark’s fin soup.  Their numbers have already  dropped by around 70 percent globally, according to some studies.   