This year will likely be the warmest ever recorded, with  soaring ocean temperatures resulting in a near record die-off  of tropical corals, extreme heat and drought in Russia and  massive flooding in Pakistan - all signs that climate change  has taken hold. But despite the ever more compelling science regarding the  urgency and risks of climate change and growing public  support for action, representatives from nearly 200  countries meeting here in Cancún for the next two weeks are  unlikely to produce a new binding agreement. At best, matters such as forestry, climate finance and  mitigation commitments will be further developed in the  faint hope that the next big meeting in South Africa might  produce some kind of deal. 'Carbon emissions continue to climb despite the economic  recession and yet I have never seen such low expectations  for a COP (Conference of the Parties),' said Richard  Somerville, an eminent climate scientist at the Scripps  Institution of Oceanography in California. 'The science is quite compelling regarding the need for  urgent action.  We don't have another five years to reach an  agreement,' Somerville told TerraViva. In 2009, Somerville and others co-authored an update on the  latest climate science called 'The Copenhagen Diagnosis'  which concluded that global carbon emissions had to peak and  begin to decline before 2020 to have any hope of keeping  global warming to less than 2. 0 degrees C. However, the negotiators in Cancún will mostly not be acting  on the science but on their national interests as directed  by their political leadership, who largely do not understand  climate change, he said. 'Developed countries think they can adapt to warmer  temperatures.  I don't see how we can keep warming below 2. 0  degrees C. ,' Somerville said. Cancún is the 16th meeting of the Conference of Parties of  the U. N.  Framework Convention on Climate Change, an  international body formed after the 1992 Rio Earth Summit to  deal with the pressing global problem of climate change. At that time, virtually all countries agreed that emissions  of greenhouse gases, particularly carbon dioxide, had to  decline.  In Kyoto, Japan, industrialised countries promised  to reduce their emissions by five percent from the 1990 base  year. However, global carbon dioxide emissions from fossil fuels  in 2008 were 40 percent higher than those in 1990 primarily  because northern countries like the United States failed to  make reductions while emissions by some developing countries  like China increased dramatically. At the last COP in Copenhagen, industrialised countries  agreed to keep the rise in global temperatures below 2. 0 C.   However, even if countries live up to their vague emission  reduction pledges in the Copenhagen Accord, humanity is  headed for 2. 6-5C of warming by 2100 by most analyses. This range is what most scientists call dangerous or  catastrophic climate change, including the loss of coral  reefs and other important ecosystems.  Moreover, the northern  latitudes will heat up much more than the global average -  perhaps seven to 14 degrees C in the polar regions - almost  certainly guaranteeing the release of vast quantities of  methane from the Arctic permafrost. 'Potential methane release from northern permafrost and  wetlands under future climate change is of great concern,'  warned the World Meteorological Organisation in a bulletin  last week.  Methane is a greenhouse gas with 25 times more  warming potential than carbon dioxide, and now has  atmospheric levels 158 percent higher than pre-industrial  times. The Copenhagen Accord has so many loopholes countries can  claim they've kept their promises while increasing their  emissions, said Sivan Kartha, a climate scientist at the  Stockholm Environment Institute, an independent  international policy research institute. 'It should be exposed for the embarrassment that it is, the  loopholes closed off and national reduction commitments  increased,' Kartha told IPS. The strong sense of common purpose at the Rio Earth Summit  to meet the dangers of climate change has been lost and  negotiations reduced to what seems to be just another trade  negotiation, he said. 'In Copenhagen the open, transparent and democratic process  that had been key to earlier negotiations vanished.  It may  be the same in Cancún where small groups of countries do  deals behind closed doors,' he said. Such deals nearly always tilt negotiations to just one  perspective.  What works for China and the U. S. , for example,  may be very bad for those countries most impacted by climate  change, Kartha says.  'The urgency we face should not justify  a bad deal for some. 'The exclusion of the interests of small countries and civil  society in Copenhagen prompted 35,000 members of the public  and global civil society to meet in Bolivia for a parallel  'people's summit' last April.  They signed the Cochabamba  People's Accord calling for recognition of a 'Universal  Declaration of the Rights of Mother Earth' and the creation  of an International Climate and Environmental Justice  Tribunal. However, those proposals from Cochabamba have been excluded  from the formal negotiations here in Cancún, according to La  Via Campesina, an international peasant movement with  millions of members. 'During the last moments of discussion, the proposals of the  People's Agreement signed in Cochabamba have been left  aside,' said Alberto Gomez from La Via Campesina  international coordination. The organisation is mobilising thousands of supporters to  march on Cancún to pressure governments to adopt the  measures in the Cochabamba People’s Accord.  A mass  demonstration will be held Dec.  7 in Cancún and many other  locations around the world.  In Cancún, an estimated 6,000  heavily armed Mexican military and police are already on  hand to meet them. 'We do not agree with false solutions such as the carbon  market because, far from reducing greenhouse gases, it will  sooner or later create a speculative system leading the  world into another global financial crisis,' Gomez said in a  statement. 'La Via Campesina mobilises to denounce the irresponsibility  of most of the governments who choose to support the capital  rather than the interest of their nation and of humanity as  a whole,' he said. 