More than 11 percent of Peruvian territory is distributed among mining  concessions.  Those mining blocks can include moors, river sources, and even  protected natural areas. Maps of mining areas and fragile ecosystems overlap in this South American  nation with vast mineral wealth.  Environmental organisations are calling on  the government to issue new land-use regulations that would establish zones  of exclusion for mining. The total area covered by mining rights in Peru nearly doubled between 2006  and 2009, from 11. 6 million hectares to about 20 million. As a result, more than 40 percent of the highland moors, known in Spanish as  'páramos,' of the northern region of Piura have been turned over to mining  projects, according to the government's mining institute INGEMMET and the  non-governmental U. S. -based Mountain Institute.  The páramos, which act as sponges, and the cloud forests of the Andes --  both located between 1,500 and 2,500 metres above sea level -- are  important sources of water for Piura's arid areas. During the dry season, the highland plateau drains its water slowly, thus  maintaining life in the valley, regulating the water cycle and supplying the  farms below.  The for-export lemon and mango crops provide livelihoods for  thousands in Piura. About 14. 9 million hectares are under concession, according to INGEMMET  figures published in May.  Currently, just 0. 69 percent of that area is being  mined, and 0. 63 percent is being explored for minerals.  However, complaints have already been filed about water contamination and  land disputes have erupted. 'If the exploitation of a small mine already causes these serious social  conflicts, what will happen with the rest of the concessions? This cannot be  left in the private sector's hands; the government has to intervene to regulate  land use,' Rommy Torres, of the non-governmental Cities for Life Forum, told  Tierramérica. In this country, more than 60 percent of the social conflicts are related to  environmental problems, according to the Office of the People's Defender  (ombudsman). In Piura, the problems revolve around the Zijin Consortium, based on Chinese  capital, which is exploring the Río Blanco for copper.  Around the area to be  mined are páramos and the Quiroz and Chinchipe rivers, which flow through  Piura and Cajamarca provinces. At the request of the Muqui Action Network, an umbrella of some 20  institutions that support the communities in defending their rights, the Cities  for Life Forum is drafting a proposal for land-use regulations. The initiative is intended to integrate the local, regional and national policies,  avoid isolated decision-making, and ensure that the government entities  involved -- like the ministries of Environment and Agriculture -- establish  basic criteria to determine which economic activities are feasible in each  territory. The Executive Branch is also drawing up a land regulation proposal, which is  to incorporate opinions from civil society. The Muqui Network wants the government to create a sub-ministry with the  authority to implement the policies. But what should be protected? In Torres's view, the answer is clear: glaciers,  river sources, zones at risk of natural disaster, fragile Amazonian ecosystems,  and land with high agro-ecological value. Most of Peru's official protected natural areas do not have an overall plan that  identifies their potential economic activities. In 2007, the Constitutional Court ruled that such plans are necessary to  determine the compatibility of natural resource exploration and exploitation  with conservation. 'The idea is not to eliminate mining, but rather break down the productive  scheme in order to get a cross-section view for territorial management,' José  de Echave, an economist with the non-governmental group CooperAcción,  told Tierramérica. Only in the regions of San Martín and Amazonas, in the north, and Cuzco, in  the south, has economic-ecological zoning taken place -- the step prior to  territorial planning. 'The central government prefers disorder so that it can continue blindly  giving out mining concessions.  Otherwise it means beginning from zero, and  there is no political will to do that,' Carlos Martínez, mayor of the San Ignacio  district in the northwestern department (province) of Cajamarca, told  Tierramérica. 'Nor is there the political will in some regional governments, even though  part of the authority has been transferred to them,' he added. Meanwhile, Argentina passed a law this year to protect glaciers from mining,  Costa Rica penalises the use of cyanide in mining, and Ecuador is trying to  obtain an international fund to compensate it for keeping oil drilling out of  the Yasuní region of the Amazon. Three years ago, the opposition Peruvian Nationalist Party presented a  legislative bill to declare the páramos and cloud forests 'public necessity,' but  so far lacks the votes for it to become law. When the land-use regulations are implemented, 'they should guarantee  communities access to information and prior consultation,' said Magdiel  Carrión, a community leader from Piura and president of the National  Confederation of Peruvian Communities Affected by Mining. 'What happens in the highlands will affect the lowlands of the valley.  That is  why we should be consulted about the kind of development we want,' said  Carrión. (*This story was originally published by Latin American newspapers that are  part of the Tierramérica network.  Tierramérica is a specialised news service  produced by IPS with the backing of the United Nations Development  Programme, United Nations Environment Programme and the World Bank. ) 