As negotiators meet in Cancùn to discuss how to mitigate the  worst effects of climate change, the impacts of the oil spill  disaster that unfolded earlier this year on the other side of  the Gulf of Mexico are still rippling through Washington. On Wednesday, they led to the U. S.  government announcing it  was rescinding a decision made in the pre-oil spill days and  not opening up more regions in the southeastern U. S.  to  offshore oil drilling. The announcement ends one of the last unfinished chapters of  the saga that began when the well below the BP-operated  Deepwater Horizon offshore oil rig began spewing oil into  the Gulf of Mexico on Apr.  20.  Eventually, the well was  capped, but, along with lingering questions over the health  effects of the oil and the dispersants used to get rid of  it, one main question that remained was how far would  President Barack Obama's administration go in ensuring  against another such catastrophe?Though the leak was declared stopped in September, it was  not before more than an estimated four million barrels of  crude oil had seeped into the gulf and another two million  gallons of chemical dispersants were sprayed, significantly  damaging marine and coastal habitat, the livelihoods of  fishers and others, and, many contend, the health of  residents and cleanup workers. Just prior to the disaster, in March, Obama announced he  would be expanding offshore drilling activities.  As the  magnitude of the gulf oil spill grew, though, he temporarily  banned new deepwater offshore drilling activities in the  Gulf of Mexico. This announcement drew an outcry from those who said the ban  would cost too many jobs, though studies showed that the  number of jobs lost was minimal and many groups argued it  was a small price to pay to be sure to avoid another massive  disaster. Saying the government failed to sufficiently demonstrate the  need for a moratorium, a federal court ordered the  government to rescind it.  The government then issued another  moratorium and courts again order a withdrawal.  By that  time, though, the government said that the ban was no longer  necessary since it felt enhanced safety requirements and  other safeguards had been implemented. Strengthening those regulations, though, has been an ongoing  process, and on Wednesday Secretary of the Interior Ken  Salazar said that in order to get the regulations right, the  government would limit offshore oil drilling leases so it  can focus on ensuring that the ones that already exist are  done safely. 'As a result of the Deepwater Horizon oil spill we learned a  number of lessons, most importantly that we need to proceed  with caution and focus on creating a more stringent  regulatory regime.  As that regime continues to be developed  and implemented, we have revised our initial March leasing  strategy to focus and expand our critical resources on areas  with leases that are currently active,' said Salazar. The announcement rescinds the March decision, which would  have allowed for expanded drilling along the eastern Gulf of  Mexico and the U. S. 's southern and mid-Atlantic coasts. Leases for drilling in the western and coastal Gulf of  Mexico as well as parts of Alaska's Arctic Sea coasts would  still go forward, however, though they would be subject to  longer, stricter environmental reviews by regulators. Environmental groups generally felt the decision was the  right one, but regretted that it did not go farther. The executive director of the Natural Resources Defense  Council, Peter Lehner, called putting drilling in the  protected regions off-limits 'the right thing to do'. 'This action creates a no blow-out zone in the Atlantic and  Pacific oceans and the Eastern Gulf.  It protects these  waters and the millions of Americans who depend upon them  from the kind of catastrophic spill still poisoning the Gulf  seven months after the BP disaster,' he said. But Lehner also noted how the decision leaves open the  possibility of drilling in some fragile Arctic regions. 'We don’t yet know how to clean up oil in sea ice  conditions, where oil breaks down slowly, if at all.  These  seas are home to one-fifth of the world’s polar bears, as  well as seals, migratory birds, endangered bowhead whales,  beluga whales, walrus and other marine life.  Until we know  how to protect this region from the risk of a blow-out and  how to clean up oil spills in Arctic waters, these areas,  too, need to be off-limits to drilling,' he said. Athan Manuel, director of land protection at the Sierra  Club, also called the decision a significant step, but, he  noted, 'an oil spill like the BP disaster could happen  anywhere — in Alaska, or in other parts of the central and  western Gulf Coast where drilling is allowed. 'He said the U. S.  faces a choice between reliance on fossil  fuels obtained through practices like offshore drilling and  moving to more sustainable sources of energy, including  offshore wind farms. 'Last week, the [Obama] administration announced plans to  facilitate responsible offshore wind development.  By  encouraging clean energy like wind instead of more offshore  drilling, the administration will help protect coastal jobs  and communities,' Manuel said. 'We can continue to destroy coastal communities in the  pursuit of dirty, outdated energy like oil.  Or we can  aggressively invest in clean energy like wind that will  create good jobs here at home and keep America competitive  in the global clean energy economy. '