Japanese NGOs feel that Prime Minister Naoto Kan's categorical  statement in parliament on Monday that his government would  not under any circumstances be party to a continuation of the  Kyoto Protocol, which was signed in that historic city in  1997, went 'beyond irony'. Although the government's position on not proceeding with a  second phase of the protocol, which begins in 2012, has been  known for a couple of years, this is the first time that the  prime minister has publicly stated it in public.  The  announcement on the opening day of the U. N.  climate summit  in Cancún was timed to drive home a point. Yuri Onodera, programme director for Climate Change and  Energy of Friends of the Earth, Japan, told journalists  Wednesday, 'Japan's move to drop out of the Kyoto treaty  shows a severe lack of recognition of its own historical and  moral responsibility.  With this position, Japan isolates  itself from the rest of the world.  Even worse, this step  undermines the ongoing talks and is a serious threat to the  progress needed here in Cancún. 'He told TerraViva the government's move may have arisen due  to 'frustration over the process' regarding major emerging  economies in general, and China in particular, not agreeing  to commit to reduce their emissions.  The prime minister's move also came in the context of  increasing tensions between the two major Asian countries. 'Specifically regarding China, Japan has a territorial  dispute.  There is also economic competition, with China  surpassing Japan as the world's second biggest economy.   There is sentiment involved, I suppose,' Onodera added.  However, Onodera, who had been active with many fellow  activists in helping forge the Kyoto Protocol 13 years ago,  still expects the government to commit to combating global  warming. 'Japan recognises its place in the international community,'  he said.  'It would like to present a good face and project  itself as a consensus builder.  It is a truly significant for  Japan, for its public image and its foreign policy.  It is a  matter of national pride.  It would not like to be seen as  dealing with this issue single-handedly. ''Many people will be watching if Japan is seen as not  participating in the process,' he continued. The government felt that substantive progress had been  achieved after Copenhagen.  If its role as consensus-builder  went the wrong way, Japan would be seen as a blocker, which  it would not like and the prime minister could change its  policy, he said. He did not think that the U. S.  would treat this as a  precedent and cite Japan's pull-out to justify its own hard  line against the Kyoto Protocol. 'This administration is different,' he felt, 'it won't  destroy the process openly.  I truly hope that the U. S.   doesn't.  The continuance of the Kyoto Protocol is critical  for underdeveloped countries to be engaged in the process. 'Asked by TerraViva whether the Japanese prime minister's  statement had any resonance in U. S.  climate policy, Dr.   Jonathan Pershing, a top U. S.  negotiator, said that since  the U. S.  was not a signatory to the Kyoto Protocol, it was  not for it to comment on this development.  However, he added that he was aware of 'previous  discussions' about Japan's opposition to a continuance of  the treaty, on which Japan was 'quite clear'.  There were now  two tracks — one for continuing with Kyoto and the other  without. 'It is every country's right to take its own decision, just  as it is important for a group of countries to move  forward,' he said. 'Russia is also a concern in this respect,' Ondera told  TerraViva.  'It has made its support for the second phase of  the protocol conditional on other major emerging economies,  but at the same time, it is also flexible.  Japan is moving  in the opposite direction and will be isolated. 'NGOs in Japan were engaging with government policies of all  ministries and mobilising the public to tackle global  warming.  'Recent economic issues, including nearly five  percent unemployment, had diverted the attention of the  government and opened up policies to hardline elements,' he  concluded. The U. N.  climate talks in Cancún are seen as a critical test  in which the credibility of the multilateral process of the  climate talks and trust of developing countries can be  reestablished, said Friends of the Earth.  Developing  countries suffer from the impacts of climate change caused  by industrial countries like Japan.  In spite of this, Japan  had made its intentions more than clear during the first two  days in Cancún. Friends of the Earth International has urgently demanded  that Japan reconsider its position and stop stalling climate  talks, which have just begun.  All rich countries, including  Japan, should agree on cutting their emissions by at least  40 percent by 2020, without resorting to carbon offsetting,  and agree to doing this under a second commitment period of  the Kyoto Protocol, the group said. 