The wide-ranging knowledge about climate variation possessed  by native people and other small farmers, such as the people  in one region of Colombia, is almost a perfect match to  scientific measurements recorded on high-tech instruments. So says Andrés González, coordinator of the Joint Programme  on Integration of Ecosystems and Adaptation to Climate  Change in the Colombian Massif, carried out for the last  three years by United Nations agencies. In the southwestern Colombian department (province) of Valle  del Cauca, indigenous people and scientists are working  together on ways to adapt to climate change.  But this is an  exceptional case in Latin America. This year, a network of seed savers or 'guardianes' has been  set up to preserve the seeds of tubers, maize, fruit trees,  fodder species, quinoa, amaranth and other food crops of  high nutritional value, and to promote seed exchanges among  the autonomous indigenous reserves of Puracé, Paletará,  Coconuco, Quintana and Poblazón. Plots of land to acclimatise the seeds have also been  created, as well as six agricultural schools where  scientists and small farmers study and discuss food  security, sustainable production, risk management and  healthy environments.  About 1,000 families from the  municipalities of Popayán and Puracé are taking an active  part. The programme's direct impact area in Valle del Cauca has a  population of 11,000, but it is estimated that its wider  benefits extend to over 240,000 people.  González hopes that  funding for the project, which has another six months to  run, will be renewed.   Historically, land conflicts have been frequent between the  indigenous reserves, small farmers and large landowners.   However, all sides signed 'Pactos de Convivencia' (peaceful  coexistence agreements) and worked together to draw up  calendars of production activities and lists of species  resistant to various climate conditions. But 'much remains to be done.  Establishing a dialogue in  which we can understand the logic (of peasants and  indigenous people) and they can understand ours, is a major  challenge,' González told IPS. The project, sponsored by the Millennium Development Goals  Achievement Fund (MDG-F), is headed by a team that includes  representatives of native communities, who act as  'counterparts to our technicians and experts, and ensure  that their concepts and worldview are a fully respected part  of the programme,' he said. The MDGs, adopted by U. N.  member states in 2000, include  specific targets to curb poverty, hunger, maternal and child  mortality, gender inequality, and diseases like HIV/AIDS and  malaria, as well as to achieve universal primary education,  environmental sustainability and a global partnership for  development, by 2015. Indigenous people and small farmers could not have been left  out of the leadership of the Colombian climate change  adaptation project, because their acute observations and  empirical knowledge are so precise, González said.  In Latin America, farming is responsible for about 30  percent of the greenhouse gas emissions that cause global  warming.  The main contributing factors are changes in land  use, fertiliser application and decomposition of livestock  manure. And agriculture is already being affected by climate change,  for instance the greater intensity and frequency of extreme  weather phenomena -- floods, frosts and droughts -- the  arrival of new pests, changes in water availability as  glaciers melt, and geographical displacement of crops.  Added to this, over 50 percent of the rural population of  Latin America and the Caribbean are living below the poverty  line, and nearly one-third of these are indigent (extremely  poor), according to the Santiago-based Economic Commission  for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC). 'Farmers know about climate change because that is what  agriculture is: dealing with the climate,' said Laura Meza,  coordinator of the Food and Agriculture Organisation (FAO)  Multidisciplinary Team for South America on climate change  and the environment. Encouraging dialogue between academia and small farmers is  'a challenge our region still faces,' she told IPS. 'We have discovered that in Australia there is a very strong  connection between farmers, scientists and decision-makers.   All three groups are working hand in hand,' said the FAO  expert. 'Here they are in separate watertight compartments.  We need  a great deal more communication between them,' Meza  stressed. Adrián Rodríguez, officer in charge of the agricultural  development unit within ECLAC's Division of Production,  Productivity and Management, told IPS that communication  between countries is also needed, 'because we are facing a  phenomenon that recognises no borders. ''It's high time the ancestral knowledge possessed by small  farmers and indigenous people was appreciated at its true  value,' Rosa Guamán, a Quechua indigenous woman, told IPS.   She belongs to the Jambi Kiwa Association of Medicinal Plant  Producers of Chimborazo, Ecuador, a thriving cooperative  business run by indigenous women who export herbs to Canada  and European countries. As an indigenous leader, and as a leader of the Association,  Guamán had to overcome a great deal of prejudice to get her  knowledge recognised and accepted, because she has no formal  academic credentials, she said. 'I don't think there's any surefire recipe' for effective  dialogue, Holm Tiessen, head of the intergovernmental Inter- American Institute for Global Change Research, based in Sao  Paulo, Brazil, told IPS. 'What often happens is that science discovers solutions for  problems that nobody has.  Therefore, at some point during  planning and seeking research funding, it is important to  talk to people in the field.  But there are no established  mechanisms for doing this,' he said. 'As a funding body, we have to insist that scientists open  their eyes and their minds, and go out and talk, engage in  dialogue with producers, in order to improve the efficiency  of their research,' said Tiessen.  The institute funds  collaborative studies involving more than one country. In Meza's view, public policies should urgently be directed  at increasing knowledge about climate, strengthening  meteorological networks, and spreading the information among  authorities and farmers. This would allow farmers to make key decisions, such as  'taking out insurance policies, using fast-growing crop  varieties that need less water in case of drought,  conserving organic material in the soil to preserve  humidity, or building sheds for livestock,' among other  practical measures, she said. Brazil, for instance, is a leader in the process of 'agro- ecological zoning,' which maps the areas and seasons that  are most suitable for particular crops.  Other countries are  making progress on river basin management, irrigation  systems and risk management. 'But there is so much to be done.  Climate change is still  seen as being a long way off, and that is a real problem,  because decision-makers and farmers, as well as society in  general, don't realise the urgency of taking immediate  action,' Meza concluded. *This IPS story is part of a series supported by the Climate  and Development Knowledge Network http://www. cdkn. org.  