The last time Moazzam Khan saw sawfish in the Arabian Sea was  in 1984.  'At one time, salted and dried fish formed a large  part of our exports,' recalls Khan, director general of the  Karachi Fisheries Department.  'In the last 30 years, there may  be other marine life that may have vanished of which we may  not be aware. '   The state of fisheries may not be obvious from the busy  scene at the Karachi Fish Harbour, where mammoth-sized arks  in various stages are being built, and the loading and  unloading of goods continues uninterrupted.    Built in 1959 to house 600 boats, the harbour today hosts  some 2,000 small and medium-sized boats that jostle for  space in a colourful, haphazard manner.     But Khan says these do not change the fact that fish  catch has been going down.  'Fish exhaustion may be between  30 to 40 percent and it is indeed cause for worry. ' Fish and  shellfish landing in 1999 was 480,000 metric tonnes, but by  2007 had declined to 340,000 metric tonnes.     At one time, fisheries was Pakistan’s third largest  export industry, but today it may be 'somewhere standing at  the 30th position,' estimates Khan.  He cites the example of  shark, which sit atop the marine food chain.  From 350,000  sharks caught in 1999, this has fallen to 5,000 in recent  times.    While factors like the rise in surface water temperature  and erratic climactic conditions such as frequent cyclones  in the Arabian Sea may have contributed to the decline of  fish in Pakistani waters, greed has compounded the problem,  activists say.    'In coastal waters, illegal (fine-meshed) nets literally  sieve everything out of the water, including all the  juveniles that would eventually make it out to sea.  There is  no check on what species are being caught; often 'trash  fish’ are left to die and then dumped over the side of the  boats.  These trash are either undersized or are not  economically viable, but are important to the marine  ecosystem nonetheless,' explains Rab Nawaz, director of  Indus For All, a programme of the World Wildlife for Nature  (WWF).      But more than the use of the harmful nets, Khan believes  the fish exhaustion is due to the 'unwieldy fleet size which  has resulted in over exploitation of our marine resources. '   Sixty-year old fisher Abdul Aziz of Ebrahim Hyderi, a  fishing village 15 kilometres from the city centre, has  witnessed a drastic drop in catch.   'Fishing is no more an  indigenous occupation,' he laments.  'There are many who have  entered this to mindlessly exploit the marine wealth.  They  do not have the conventional sagacity needed for sustainable  living. '   'They use destructive nets like the ‘katra’ or seine nets  and ‘bulla’ or the estuarine set bag nets,' says the  unlettered, betel-chewing Aziz.    The mesh size of the nets is so small that they trap even  juvenile fish, which are then thrown back into the water,  says Kamal Shah, of the Pakistan Fisherfolk Forum (PFF).  He  also blames environmental problems, such as the industrial  and organic waste from a nearby cattle colony that goes  untreated into the sea.      Activists also blame feudal lords 'with political  connections' who are not fazed by the penalty on the use of  these nets.    Syed Haroon Ali Rizvi, deputy director at the Karachi  Fisheries, acknowledges that 'political interference' often  comes in the way of his work in controlling the use of these  nets.  'There are 17 creeks and to cover these areas is an  expensive venture.  For every raid that we carry out, we  spend about 20,000 rupees (233 U. S.  dollars) and on top of  that, there is a threat to our life from the miscreants. '       But Khan thinks otherwise.  'The fishermen are all in  collusion.  If their counterpart in Damb, near Sonmiani (a  coastal town in Balochistan province) can destroy these  nets, why cannot the fishermen do the same here? If tomorrow  they refuse to catch fish with these nets, their employers  can’t do much. '   Aziz remembers the time when fishers 'would wander just a  few miles into the sea and come back with a boatload full of  good fish. ' Communities had 'plenty to eat' and there was  much contentment 'unlike now', he rues.    PPF estimates that 400,000 people are dependent on the  fisheries sector in Pakistan, with marine fishing providing  livelihood for 184,000 people along the 1,000-km Arabian Sea  coast in Sindh and Balochistan provinces.    Looking down at the murky water, Aziz asks: 'Can you see  anything?' Without waiting for a response, he answers: 'Till  the 1980s, this water was crystal clear.  You could throw a  50-paisa coin and could see it lying on the seabed!'    According to official estimates, 411 of the 472 million  gallons per day (mgd) of waste produced by Karachi goes into  the sea untreated.    This has led to a situation where Pakistani fish and fish  products fail to meet world food safety standards, so they  cannot enter the European Union market.    Until 2005, transnational fleets were a threat to  traditional fishers under Pakistan’s policy of opening up  its waters to the former, but officials say this is no  longer the case.  'We have not given or renewed licenses to  any foreign trawlers since 2005,' says Khan.  But PFF  chairman Mohammad Ali Shah counters: 'There is no fish, so  why should they roam our waters?'    Khan says the smuggling of fish to Iran is also going on  via Balochistan.  'By allowing foreign trawlers, the national  exchequer was getting some funds.  With smuggling, we are  facing a far greater loss. '    Fish catch needs to be restricted, Khan believes.  'This  can be done by limiting the entry of boats, limiting the  total allowable catch and ensuring the boats must not stay  in the deep sea for more than 55 days. '   Pakistan’s government is carrying out a detailed survey  of fish stocks in the Arabian Sea with the Norway-based  Institute of Marine Research.  'Once the data is available,  it will provide us with a clearer picture of our marine  resources,' says Khan.   