New eco-labels on Icelandic seafood are misleading and unregulated, concealing  practices that damage the environment, critics say. Increasingly, Icelandic fishing companies are focusing their attention on  foreign markets.  In order to appeal to eco-conscious consumers abroad,  many of these corporations are introducing labels that guarantee their  products as 'certified responsible seafood'. However, critics claim that these labels obscure the truth of the fishing  industry in Iceland, which relies on over-fishing and ecologically damaging  practices to meet demand for profit.  One problem with the new labeling system is that it doesn’t rely on any  objective criteria for certification - individual companies are responsible for  certifying their own products as ecologically friendly without having to meet  any specific standards.  This has resulted in an array of labels for all types of  fish. Icelandic cod, for example, can be certified as eco-friendly in a variety of  ways. Finnur Gardarsson, a member of the Fisheries Association of Iceland, told IPS  that Icelandic cod fisheries are being evaluated by Global Trust Certification,  an 'independent, accredited, third-party certification body' based in Ireland  that will complete the certification process within the next few weeks,  labeling the cod 'Iceland responsible fisheries — certified'. At the same time, the Icelandic Group, one of the top ten seafood companies  worldwide, has begun a Marine Stewardship Council (MSC) that will label  Icelandic cod and haddock 'certified responsible seafood — MSC'. And Ny-fiskur, a fishing company that operates in the southwestern tip of  Iceland, is beginning to label its cod 'Friend of the Sea'.  In addition, an 'Iceland Responsible Fisheries' logo, which was developed in  2009 in response to requests by overseas buyers, is currently being used by  more than 80 companies to market their fish abroad.  The only criterion is that  all the fish being sold must be of Icelandic origin.   Underneath the issue of using dubious certification for marketing purposes  lies a deeper criticism: that the fishing industry in its current state is causing  harm to the environment by relying on damaging practices.  Gretar Mar Jonsson, a long-time fisherman and former member of the Althing  (Icelandic parliament), told IPS that with the current fishing management  system, 'men only land the best fish, discarding the rest, which means we are  not treating our resources well. 'Greenpeace echoed this statement in its International Seafood Red List.  'For  (haddock) stocks in Northeast Arctic and Iceland, scientists have  recommended that better management is needed,' it said.  'Greenland halibut  stock levels are at a historic low in waters around Iceland. 'Scientists have advised that fishing should be reduced,' it added. However, Icelandic quotas have been increased for both haddock and  Greenland halibut.   For the latter, the International Council for the Exploration  of the Sea (ICES) recommended a catch of 5,000 tonnes for Iceland, East  Greenland and the Faroes combined.  Icelandic authorities subsequently  decided on a quota of 13,000 tonnes, almost three times the recommended  amount. In addition, the Scripps Institution of Oceanography says that 'fisheries that  are being heavily depleted, reliant on high-impact methods such as bottom  trawling that aren't destined for human consumption, should be excluded  from certification. ' Bottom trawling, an industrial fishing method that drags large, heavy nets  across the seafloor, has been shown to kill corals, sponges, fishes, and other  animals.  The method is heavily restricted around the globe and, in some  waters, banned. Information from the Directorate of Fisheries reveals that bottom trawls  accounted for 44. 5 percent of the total catch of Icelandic ships in the 2009- 2010 fishing year.  The practice was used for catching main commercial fish:  cod, haddock, saithe, and other demersal species.   