The European Bank for Reconstruction and Development is reneging on pledges  to support low-carbon economic models in Eastern Europe, and is instead  ramping up its lending for fossil-fuel energy projects, critics say. Critics say the bank (EBRD), created solely to help former communist  countries transform their economies, more than tripled its lending for fossil  fuel projects in 2008-2009, and is approving energy investments which  would effectively lock countries in carbon-intensive economies for decades.  Fidanka Bacheva-McGrath of the NGO Bankwatch Network told IPS: 'The EBRD  has publicly said that it wants to back economies’ transition to low-carbon  models, but the numbers are saying something different - that they are  backing fossil fuel projects. 'The EBRD was created in 1991 to help former communist states across  Eastern Europe and central Asia following the fall of the Iron Curtain.  Since  then it has invested heavily in projects in a raft of sectors.  Its owners and  financers include 61 countries and two EU institutions.  Bankwatch and other  groups say this means its lending for such projects is in effect using public  money. In recent years the EBRD has publicly stated a clear intention to promote  energy efficiency, renewable energy and low-carbon economic models.  But  Bankwatch says this commitment is now in doubt as data from the EBRD  shows that it is in fact increasing lending to projects based on exploitation of  environmentally-damaging fossil fuels.  It says that the bank's lending for coal, oil and gas power projects rose  dramatically between 2006 and 2009 from a total of approximately 250  million euros in 2006 to over 1. 3 billion euros in 2009, and that it tripled in  2008-2009 from 419 million euros to 1. 3 billion euros.  It adds that although  the EBRD has made 'praiseworthy' investments in energy efficiency averaging  around 533 million euros per year, it has invested only 80 million euros per  year in the 2006-2009 period in renewable energy projects. The group says that its figures include EBRD lending to fossil fuel energy  efficiency projects.  But it points out that even if different methodology were  used and fossil fuel energy efficiency projects were not included as fossil fuel  investments, EBRD lending for fossil fuel projects has still risen sharply in the  same period, and more than doubled between 2008 and 2009. The EBRD has come under attack from other groups, such as the  environmental movement Friends of the Earth over its lending for fossil fuel  energy projects, and has been criticised for ignoring concerns over projects’  environmental impacts. In 2006 the bank launched a Sustainable Energy Initiative aimed at helping to  improve energy efficiency and promote the use of renewable energy sources.   But Bankwatch says the EBRD’s most recent plans show it intends to continue  its heavy support for fossil fuel projects. It points out that one of the EBRD’s most recently approved investments is a  250 million euros loan for a new block at a lignite fired power plant in  Slovenia.  The group says that the project will tie the central European state to  a carbon-intensive economic model for decades.  The EBRD has also recently announced plans to take a 21. 9 million euros  stake in the Central Europe Oil Company, which aims to redevelop  hydrocarbon reservoirs in Central Europe.  Bacheva-McGrath told IPS: 'The EBRD will go on investing more and more in  fossil fuel projects.  We have heard that they are interested in coal projects  and we expect coal will be on the rise on their agenda.  The EBRD will say that  they are doing this because the demand is there (for fossil fuels) and these  (CEE) countries have these resources and can benefit from them.  But we say  that public money should not be going into these projects. 'When contacted by IPS about Bankwatch’s claims, the EBRD defended its  energy investment policy.  Anthony Williams, head of media relations at EBRD  told IPS: 'As far as fossil fuels are concerned, the EBRD continues to finance  such projects provided that acceptable technical, financial, governance,  transparency and environmental standards are capable of being met.  EBRD  involvement in such projects always aims to achieve the highest possible  environmental standards.  'It is also important to recognise that fossil fuel-based projects along the  supply chain, where they are part of the least-cost fuel mix, can have an  important positive economic impact as drivers of economic growth in  countries or regions otherwise poor in resources and opportunities, and/or  part of a clearly developed low-carbon economic growth strategy. 'He added that the EBRD’s investments in energy efficiency - which Bankwatch  said 'can only be welcomed' - was key to helping reduce carbon intensity in  the region’s economies. 'The EBRD’s role in the modernisation of existing power plants also plays an  important role in helping to reduce their carbon intensity,' Williams said.  'The  EBRD region has many outdated and inefficient power generation units which  can be upgraded to achieve significantly improved efficiency and meet the  EBRD’s standards for environmental performance, while prolonging their life  for an interim period of 10-20 years. 'The EBRD will continue, where feasible, to prioritise projects that will  introduce advanced technology for increased efficiency and reduced  emissions, such as combined heat and power plants,' Williams said. But Bankwatch believes that the EBRD must move away from further fossil fuel  project investments if it is to fulfil its remit of helping countries in the region  change their economies to long-term sustainable models that will benefit  their people. Bacheva-McGrath told IPS: 'Doing what is easy and taking this route of  supporting fossil fuel projects will not make Central and Eastern European  countries better.  It will not lead to a more sustainable and economically  competitive future for these states.  'The EBRD should instead be supporting the development of radical  technology and projects for renewable energy and sustainable resources.  If  people keep seeing that money is being used to support fossil fuel projects  they will begin to lose faith in the EBRD’s promises to help economies  transform to low-carbon models. ' 