Some of Latin America's major cattle-producing countries will begin working as  a team in 2011 to quantify the greenhouse-effect gas emissions from their  bovine industry -- and to come up with options for reducing them. This news comes just as the 16th Conference of Parties (COP 16) to the United  Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change is under way in Mexico's  Caribbean resort city of Cancún. The planned consortium, made up of scientists from Argentina, Chile,  Colombia, Dominican Republic and Uruguay, was selected to receive financing  from FONTAGRO (Regional Fund for Agricultural Technology). The fund, whose members include 14 Latin American countries and Spain,  issued a call for proposals for mitigation and adaptation to climate change  and for strengthening food security.  The winner was a proposal called 'Climate Change and Cattle: Quantification  and Options for Mitigation of Methane and Nitrous Oxide Emissions from  Pastured Cattle. 'The project will begin by measuring methane using a conventional technique  and another more elaborate approach, developed in Argentina, in order to  compare the two, according to project coordinator Verónica Ciganda, a  Uruguayan agricultural engineer. Latin America produces just 11. 7 percent of the world's climate-changing gas  emissions, like carbon dioxide, methane and nitrous oxide, among others. But a look at the origin of South American emissions finds that most come  from rural activities.  In Argentina, livestock produces 41 percent of the  country's emissions, while in Brazil it is 56 percent, Uruguay 78 percent, and  Paraguay 97 percent, according to a study by Argentina's National Agricultural  Technology Institute (INTA). Within the agricultural sector, it is cattle production that generates most  emissions.  In South America there are 312 million head of cattle -- more than  31 percent of the global total. Methane, a powerful greenhouse gas, is generated in the digestive process of  ruminant livestock, as the feed ferments.  The gas is released into the  atmosphere through cattle exhalation and belching, and in the anaerobic  decomposition of the manure. The principal source of nitrous oxide, meanwhile, is cattle urine.  To measure  it, the scientists will use closed flow chambers in which urine is treated with a  known concentration of nitrogen to then measure the emissions of this gas.  Although the quantity of animal-origin nitrous oxide is less than that of  methane, its relative contribution to climate warming is greater.  The region's challenge is to reduce emissions while maintaining its  competitive edge in the agricultural sector, especially in the production of  foods like beef and milk. Once the measurement phase is done, the experts will study the results to  determine how they can reduce greenhouse emissions caused by cattle, said  Ciganda, who works at Uruguay's National Institute for Agricultural Research  (INIA). For example, the scientists may focus on a balanced diet for the cattle, better  pastures, genetic improvement of cattle species and more efficient sanitary  regulations. 'There are pastures that have more tannins and less fibre, and that is better  for curbing methane emissions, but we have to be careful that in reducing the  production of some gases that we don't increase others,' Ciganda told  Tierramérica. The hypothesis is that nitrous oxide emissions are low, she said, but if the  results of the measurements show them to be higher, then the experts will  also have to work on the livestock's diet. The research will take place in different areas of production, whether in  corrals or open fields, where feeding can vary widely.  The study will also try  to determine how different types of forage affect the production of  greenhouse gas emissions. The project will put to the test a new and more precise methodology for  measuring methane emissions, veterinarian Guillermo Berra, head of the  Argentine section, told Tierramérica. Three years ago, at the INTA's Patho-Biology Institute, Berra began using a  device that is set up on individual animals to measure emissions. The device, attached using a harness, has a system of tubes that run to the  rumen, the first digestive chamber in the cow, where a flow sensor registers  the volume of gas emitted.  The sensor sends an electronic signal via Internet to a computer to record the  emissions.  The method was proven in tests by several INTA units, and in 2011  will be implemented in a systematic way.  Berra noted that the greenhouse gas emissions reports that are presented  periodically by the member countries of the Convention on Climate Change  are 'estimates, not measurements. 'The regional project is aiming for concrete measurements, which are essential  for progress towards mitigating climate change.  'In order to reduce  emissions, we have to begin with very clear measurements,' said the  veterinarian. In the view of Edgar Cárdenas, professor at the National University of  Colombia's school of veterinary medicine, the project will establish a baseline  for international negotiations on milk and beef.  Until now, he said, those  emissions estimates put the blame on cattle-producing countries in  international markets and hurt their exports.  Latin America is not included in Annex I of the Kyoto Protocol on climate  change, which lists the specific emissions-reduction targets of the  industrialised countries. But the first period of obligations established by the Kyoto Protocol comes to  an end in 2012, and in the talks taking place in Cancún (Nov.  29 to Dec.  10)  there is growing pressure on the industrialised North to expand reduction  commitments to the larger developing countries, like Brazil, the world's  second largest beef producer, and first in beef exports. Emissions mitigation options are under discussion across the region, but with  care to ensure that they do not undermine livestock production, said Berra. 'It is extremely important to defend emissions reduction per unit of  production, for example, per kilo of beef or litre of milk.  If they demand an  absolute reduction of emissions, it could lead to a decline in production,' he  warned.  The project also seeks to improve the consortium countries' position on the  Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, established by the United  Nations to review and synthesise the most advanced climate science. The experts hope to achieve this through the quantification of methane and  nitrous oxide emissions of pastured cattle and determining the options for  their mitigation in each of the countries. To do so, in addition to the financing from FONTAGRO, sponsored by the  Inter-American Development Bank, the project will have backing from the  government of New Zealand, said Ciganda. ** This Tierramérica story is part of a series supported by the Climate and  Development Knowledge Network http://www. cdkn. org.  