'The hurricane season officially ended on Nov.  30,' a local  shopkeeper told this journalist reassuringly as she entered  his store with her hair blown in every direction by the wind  on a drizzly, cloudy day. The bad weather in this normally sunny resort city in  southeastern Mexico is an echo of the new wave of climate  swings around the world that have practically coincided with  the Nov.  29-Dec. 10 16th edition of the Conference of the  Parties of the United Nations Framework Convention on  Climate Change (COP16). Extreme cold and blizzards have already killed 20 people in  Europe, mainly homeless people, and have thrown airports,  railways and roads into chaos.  Meanwhile, heavy rains and  flooding have claimed lives in Latin American countries  along the Caribbean coast: Colombia, Venezuela, Panama and  Costa Rica.  	 The World Meteorological Organisation (WMO) reported  Thursday that 2010 is 'almost certain' to be one of the  three hottest years since temperature records began in 1850.   And 2001-2010 was the hottest decade in history. Nature is sending a message that could not be more timely.   Scattered around hotels, convention centres and camps  located dozens of kilometres from each other, the climate  change negotiators and activists who have come to the  biggest annual meeting on the issue seem to have lost the  nerve to pursue the initial goal of the talks that began 18  years ago. That goal was a legally binding global treaty to drastically  reduce the pollution that has unleashed climate change.   Since the chances of reaching that objective by Dec.  10 are  close to zero, the efforts are now heading in a different  direction. The talks, presentations and parallel activities are  focusing on the money needed by poor countries, technical  innovations and models for action that can be replicated.  In  short, a massive search for lifelines in an inevitable  flood. 'A lot of things are going on at different levels,' Carbon  Trade Watch activist Joanna Cabello told TerraViva.  'Some  are looking for a lifeline, to gain more allies, while  others are lobbying for ‘improvements’ in financing and  mitigation and adaptation policies. 'But 'we are entering a stage where citizens, movements and  some governments are very aware of the powerful manipulation  that is taking place, and are fed up,' she added. However, it’s not that the fundamental goal has been  forgotten in the talks, another activist said.  'It’s about  laying the bricks for reaching a binding accord,' which is  why many of the discussions are centred on achieving things  that are actually possible. For example, a global climate fund that would operate as a  'one-stop shop', in which nations of the developing world  would be represented and the financing would go where it is  needed.  At least half of these funds would have to go  towards adaptation to the impacts of climate change. But in Cabello’s view, 'the funds that are receiving so much  attention have many gaps that allow the entry of private  capital, and maybe the carbon market itself, without  mentioning the highly criticised role of the World Bank as a  facilitator' of those resources. 'Industrialised countries and corporate lobbies, interested  in strengthening and expanding the carbon markets, are doing  everything they can to present these schemes as easy fixes  and quick money for poor countries,' said the activist, who  supports the actions of the Global Justice Ecology Project  and the Indigenous Environmental Network. 'Cancun was never going to be where we would get a global  deal to tackle climate change, but the talks are in far  better health than they were at this stage in Copenhagen (at  the COP15),' Barry Coates, executive director of Oxfam New  Zealand, told TerraViva. 'We can see real progress such as setting up a fair climate  fund, and while the hype of Copenhagen has been replaced by  sobering realities of complex negotiations, we could very  well walk away at the end of these talks with hope for a  deal in Durban (South Africa, where the COP17 will be held)  next year,' Coates said. Will the world have to wait just one more year? According to  a report released by Oxfam this week, time has already run  out for the 21,000 people who died as a result of 725  extreme weather events in the first nine months of 2010. That is more than twice the number -- 10,000 people --  killed in 850 extreme weather catastrophes for the whole of  2009. One reflection of the growing sense of demoralisation is the  number of people who have showed up for COP16.  The  organisers say there are 20,000 visitors, compared to 50,000  in Copenhagen last year.  But estimates are hard to come by since the official venues  are spread all over the city, the conference is isolated  from civil society, and the parallel Klimaforum 2010 is  being held at a camp in the middle of the jungle. Cancún has more than 35,000 hotel rooms and there are 40,000  more rooms in surrounding areas.  People who depend on  tourism in this city made up of block after block of hotels  and shopping centres had hoped COP16 would push hotel  occupancy rates up to nearly 90 percent. 'But we are at less than 80 percent; we had hoped for more,'  a taxi driver complained. On the other hand, an enormous number of locals have found  work at COP16, in logistics, security and services. 'Four hundred temporary workers' are providing assistance  for delegates at bus stops alone, explained a young woman  who just graduated from college as a psychologist.  All of  the staff hired are Mexicans, which is a good thing, because  of the unemployment, she added.  By contrast, there are no  volunteers at COP16.  A sign of the times? 