A large number of social organisations are not pleased with  the international convention on Reducing Emissions from  Deforestation and Forest Degradation (REDD) being negotiated  at the COP16 climate summit. 'Our concern is that the agreement will fail to recognise  the rights of indigenous peoples, and we want it to include  our right to be consulted,' native Panamanian Marcial Arias,  secretary general of the Foundation for the Promotion of  Indigenous Knowledge (FPCI), told TerraViva. Negotiations on the REDD programme are at the centre of  debate at the COP16 (the 16th Conference of the Parties to  the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change),  being held Nov.  29-Dec.  10 in the southeastern Mexican  resort of Cancún. Dozens of academic and non-governmental organisations (NGOs)  from around the world are opposed to the approval of the new  global mechanism, dubbed REDD+, to curb deforestation,  because of fears that it would exacerbate the dispossession  of indigenous communities and theft of genetic material from  the forests, and become a lucrative business for the most  polluting companies. The programme, initially launched in 2008 by the Food and  Agriculture Organisation (FAO) and the U. N.  Development and  Environment Programmes (UNDP and UNEP, respectively), is  aimed at conversation of biodiversity and boosting carbon  storage in forests. Deforestation wipes out 13 million hectares of forest per  year worldwide and generates some 1. 5 gigatons (Gt) of  carbon dioxide (CO2), one of the main greenhouse gases that  cause global warming. The REDD initiative, which is being implemented in Panama,  Bolivia, Paraguay, the Democratic Republic of Congo, Zambia,  Tanzania, Indonesia, Papua New Guinea and Vietnam, combats  deforestation, reduces CO2 emissions and promotes access by  participating countries to technical and financial support. The programme 'seeks to take over tropical forests; it has  become the new version of carbon credits,' Camila Moreno,  representing Friends of the Earth-Brazil at the summit, told  TerraViva. Carbon credits are certified emission reduction units which  industrialised nations can buy from countries in the  developing South and count towards their greenhouse gas  emission reduction targets under the Kyoto Protocol on  climate change. The World Bank, which has become the foremost global carbon  trader while financing fossil fuel extraction, recognises  that the NGOs' concerns are valid and need to be addressed. Warren Evans, head of the World Bank's environment  department, told TerraViva in Cancún that these concerns  have existed since the debate on REDD began, and are a  healthy contribution because they can help avoid mistakes  while there is still an opportunity for them to be  addressed. The multilateral lender set up a Carbon Fund to finance  REDD+ projects.  In 2009, more than two billion dollars were  spent on activities to mitigate polluting emissions. At COP15, held in Copenhagen a year ago, six countries  pledged financing for a 3. 5 billion dollar fund to finance  REDD+ programmes. In March, another one billion dollars were contributed, and  a 10-nation committee was set up to head a world programme  against deforestation. A guide, titled Perspectives on REDD+, was launched Thursday  at Cancún by the United Nations.  'It will be important to  set ambitious but reasonable goals for what REDD+ can do for  forests.  This can be best articulated and analysed at the  national level where relevant approaches and tools can be  applied to address risks and to enhance the benefits of  REDD+,' the publication says.  The 12-page document stresses the importance of respecting  the free, informed, prior consent of indigenous people in  projects of this kind. Mechanisms like those proposed by REDD+ can provoke serious  conflicts over land ownership, the territorial rights of  native communities and the development of plantation  forestry. For this reason, indigenous organisations want any agreement  to be subject to the 2007 U. N.  Declaration on the Rights of  Indigenous Peoples. Apparently the REDD+ programme will be voluntary, in  association with national programmes to curb deforestation,  that will however be held to general standards. Mexico, Brazil and Panama are designing national REDD+  initiatives.  In Mexico some 1,000 community projects are  under way, most of them geared towards the exploitation of  forest resources. 'There are few certainties or safeguards.  We don't know how  we are to be compensated for not felling trees, or how we  will receive those benefits.  We feel we are not being taken  into account,' said Arias, a Kuna Indian. At the conference in Cancún there is some doubt about  whether the participating countries envision REDD+ as a  means of mitigating CO2 emissions, or as a mechanism to  reduce them.  In the first case, polluting countries would  simply be investing in developing nations' forests, to  compensate for the emissions they are incapable of curbing  themselves.  Meanwhile, some environmental groups want the system to be  extended to other ecosystems, like mangroves and other  coastal habitats that also provide important environmental  services. Sediments in coastal ecosystems sequester and store large  amounts of carbon, much more than plants, Emily Pidgeon,  head of the marine climate change programme at the NGO  Conservation International (CI), told TerraViva. According to CI, coastal areas are losing close to six  percent of their surface area per year, and they provide  environmental services worth over 25 billion dollars a year. A study by CI researchers, presented Thursday at the climate  summit, indicates that if well-funded, the REDD+ mechanism  could reduce the extinction rate among 2,500 forest species  by up to 80 percent. With funding of between 28 billion and 31 billion dollars  annually for five years, REDD+ would decrease total  extinctions by 78 to 82 percent, while with minimal funding  (between 5 billion and 6 billion dollars a year), forest  species extinctions would be reduced by 43 to 49 percent,  according to the report. (*This story appears in the IPS TerraViva online published  for the U. N.  Conference on Climate Change in Cancún. )  