Forest rights advocates and indigenous community organisations  from India are adding their voices to what promises to become  the newest division in the climate talks here: the inclusion  of Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and Degradation + in  developing countries, or REDD+, as an agreement. REDD+ essentially supports developing countries financially  and technically, to either prevent deforestation or  regenerate forests through afforestation. The resulting carbon sequestration is aimed to reduce  overall emissions, while the move itself will enable  sustainable forestry and halt degradation.  But the clause is not going down well with forest rights and  tribal groups in India over the draft REDD+'s use of agri- business plantations and ambiguity over the land categories  to be used for the programme, the latter of which clashes  with land rights given to tribal communities under India's  recent Forest Rights Act.  India's government is staunchly supporting REDD+.  In  December 2008, it submitted a document to the United Nations  Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) called  'REDD, Sustainable Management of Forest, and Afforestation  and Reforestation'. The government now proposes to use REDD+ as part of its  'Green India Mission' to restore 20 million hectares of land  into forests in the next 10 years, costing approximately $10  billion, and calculated to sequester 43 million tonnes of  carbon annually.  Under its climate change policies, a national REDD+  coordinating agency and a national forest carbon accounting  programme are being institutionalised.  Well-known forest and tribal rights expert Madhu Sarin  criticises the government's grouping all categories of land,  whether coconut plantations, or forest, private, community  or industrial plantations, into its fold for the programme.  She questions whether existing livelihoods, biodiversity,  and displacement of forest-dependent communities have been  taken into account by the programme.  'Without clarifying who will own the carbon, who will have  the right to decide whether to participate in carbon markets  or not, and with barely any mention of community forest  rights, the Green India Mission seems designed for garnering  REDD+ funds for undertaking plantations on community lands  in the name of increasing forest cover,' Sarin charged in  her blog on the India Environmental Portal, a news website  run by the Delhi-based Centre for Science and Environment,  with sponsorship from the Ministry of Environment & Forests  (MoEF). 'According to MoEF's own data, till 1999, 31. 21 million  hectares of forest plantations had already been undertaken.   If all the plantations had survived why would Rs 46,000  crores (US 10b) be required for another 10 mha today?' Sarin  continued. A joint statement of protest against India's support of  REDD+ has now been issued by an umbrella group of Indian  organisations, including the National Forum of Forest  Peoples and Forest Workers and tribal rights groups from 13  states. The letter highlights the 'dangers' under India's strategy  under REDD+ of denying people's land rights and forest  livelihoods under the Forest Rights Act, excluding community  participation, and allowing land grabs by private commercial  interests. But India's Environment Ministry believes it has addressed  community issues under REDD+, saying 'local communities will  be at the heart of implementation, with the Gram Sabha  [village government body] as the overarching institution  overseeing Mission implementation at the village level',  according to its brochure brought out just days before COP  16 began at Cancún. The Center for International Forestry Research (CIFOR) also  sees REDD+ as one of the best options available to reduce  carbon emissions.  While agreeing that the scientific community has so far  focused mainly on forest carbon monitoring, reporting and  verification without paying adequate attention to social  impacts, CIFOR says many REDD+ programmes identify improving  livelihoods as an important co-benefit.  CIFOR recently published 'A Guide to Learning About  Livelihood Impacts of REDD+ Projects' and is collaborating  with the government of Mexico to stage Forest Day 4 on Dec.   5, alongside the UNFCCC talks at the Cancún centre.  