Most people would not think twice about throwing out old  plastic bags, empty soda cans, scrap metal and used shampoo  bottles.  But for the students of Cavite Institute in the  Philippines, trash like these have become their ticket out of  poverty.    This is because their non-profit private school, located  in Silang in Cavite province, some 45 kilometres south of  the Philippine capital of Manila, has a scholarship  programme that allows its 852 students to pay school fees  with recyclables instead of cash.    Called WISHCRAFT, which stands for ‘We Integrate  Scholarship with the Collection of Recyclables and  Frequently Generated Trash’, the programme has enabled  students from low-income families to enroll in the school  and obtain scholarships and tuition fee discounts.    Arvee Rose Abayabay, a fourth-year high school student,  is one of those benefiting from the school’s programme.  Her  mother just left for Kuwait to work as a sewer while her  father serves in the local council.    'It’s a good programme for the students because it helps  us a lot, especially in paying our tuition fees,' says  Abayabay, who plans to pursue a degree in nursing or food  technology in university.  'The programme helps both students  and the parents transform garbage into money for education  while helping the environment. '    Elin Mondejar, who conceptualised the WISHCRAFT Programme  at the Cavite Institute, tells IPS how it works.    'All students who bring in recyclables automatically get  a credit equivalent discount on their school fees.  The  discount may be used by the student or donated to another  student in need,' says Mondejar.    Students, parents, teachers or individuals who endorse  student applicants bring in recyclable items like cartons,  paper, plastic, newspapers and glass bottles to a materials  recovery facility right beside the school, where the items  are then weighed and recorded.     The school partnered with an intermediary, who delivers  the recyclables to junk shops and gives the payment  collected from these to the school’s accounting unit, which  then does the corresponding deductions according to the  record of recyclables submitted per student.    On average, tuition and other educational and project  fees at the Cavite Institute total 30,000 pesos (680 U. S.   dollars) a year or more for students, who are from the pre- school to high school level.  School officials say that 40 to  50 percent of the students now avail of the discounts, with  some paying 25 percent less in tuition fees due to the  credits they earn from bringing in recyclable refuse.    The equivalent cost of each recyclable item depends on  the type, number and quality of the goods.  For instance,  copper wire is traded at 150 pesos (3. 4 dollars) a  kilogramme while white paper fetches six pesos (13 cents) a  kg.    School principal Corrine Realica adds that students and  teachers segregate and clean items before they bring them  in, as clean items bring in more money than dirty and  unsorted ones.    'While most rely on their own household trash, some have  branched out to their relatives and neighbors and set up  collection centres to go towards their tuition fund,'  Realica tells IPS.  'Even teachers who aren’t sending  children to school have adopted scholars because they don’t  want their trash at home to go to waste. '   Special education students who are unable to afford  school fees have also been supported by corporate  sponsorships through WISHCRAFT.  Two such students have full  scholarships under the multinational consumer goods firm  Unilever, which donates proceeds from its recyclable garbage  towards the students’ tuition.    Realica says the bulk trash donated by the company makes  quite a difference because the tuition for special education  students costs as much as 50,000 pesos a year (1,140  dollars), an amount way above what low-income families make  in a country where 44 percent or over 40 million Filipinos  live on less than two dollars a day.    A joint study by the United Nations Children's Fund  (UNICEF) and the non-government Philippine Institute for  Development Studies (PIDS) says that the number of children  aged 6-16 who are not attending school rose from 1. 8 million  in 2002 to 2. 2 million in 2007, partly due to the high cost  of education.     The WISHCRAFT programme, which was pilot-tested in 2002  and launched in 2004, is now considered a best practice for  innovation, resourcefulness, cost-effectiveness,  replicability and partnerships.  There have been various  spin-offs of this programme around the country.    A farm school uses the same trash-to-cash concept to  raise money for teachers’ salaries.  In a public school where  tuition fees are free, recyclables brought in by students  are logged and are convertible to school supplies.  An out- of-school group set up a theatre group where the entrance  fees are recyclables instead of cash.     'There is really money in garbage, and the possibilities  are endless,' says Mondejar.  'It makes students see garbage  in a different light. '   Mondejar says that the Cavite Institute programme  benefits students who want better quality education, but  cannot afford the tuition fees.  The school limits its class  size to 25 to 30 students, compared to public schools in the  area that can have up to 70 pupils in one classroom.    From 48 scholars in schoolyear 2002-2003, the number of  students having full or partial scholarships or tuition-fee  discounts now averages 500 annually.    The programme makes two social priorities meet and thrive  on each other — keeping youngsters in school and helping  clean the environment.  'To date over 300 tonnes of  recyclables which could have been disposed of in rivers,  canals and highways have been converted to a more worthy  cause — education,' Mondejar points out.   