Food production will have to increase by 70 percent to feed the expected world  population of 9 billion by 2050, says a report released Monday by the  International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD).  Agricultural output in  developing countries will have to double, the report says. This will have to be done when rural poverty is still widespread across many  developing countries.  In sub-Saharan Africa, where nearly a third of the  world’s extremely poor rural people live, the number of rural poor has risen  from 268 million to 306 million over the past decade, says IFAD’s Rural  Poverty Report 2011.  The rate of extreme poverty in rural areas is highest  here at 62 percent.  Rural poverty rates have dropped only slightly in the last decade in South  Asia, home to the world’s largest number of rural poor, about 500 million.   Most of them are considered extremely poor.  Only 11 million people in Latin America and the Caribbean are reported to live  in extreme poverty, and six million in the Middle East and North Africa.  But  the largest percentage increases in the number of hungry people in 2009  relative to 2008 were in the Middle East and North Africa, 14 percent, and in  Latin America and the Caribbean, 13 percent.  Volatile food prices, the effects of climate change, and a range of natural  resource constraints will further complicate the fight to rural poverty,  according to the report. The report also points out that over the past ten years, 350 million rural  people managed to escape desperate poverty, though global poverty remains  a predominantly rural phenomenon.  About 70 percent of the world’s 1. 4  billion extremely poor people live in rural areas. The report notes that over the past decade, extreme poverty in the rural areas  of developing countries has dropped from 48 percent to 34 percent.  The  greatest improvement is in East Asia, particularly China.  The number of extreme poor in this region fell by about two-thirds over the  past decade, from 365 million to 117 million, as did the rate of extreme  poverty, from 44 to 15 percent.  The study points out that changes in agricultural markets are leading to new  opportunities for smallholder farmers to boost productivity.  'Ongoing changes in agricultural markets offer new hope that major progress  can be made in combating rural poverty,' Ed Heinemann, who led the team of  researchers told IPS.  'The rapid growth of urban centres, particularly in capital  cities, and of urban populations’ incomes means a growing demand for  higher value products, and opens the possibility to access to more  remunerative market for smallholders.  'To push this positive process, governments, international institutions and  donors should invest in rural areas and help rural farmers to improve their  infrastructure and governance, and to reduce their transaction costs,'  Heinemann said.  'But these actors also need to have a mentoring role to help  poor rural people avoid and manage the risks they face - from natural  disasters to insecurity of access to land, and greater volatility of food prices. 'The report says the situation for women farmers - who produce most of the  food that is consumed locally in rural areas - hasn’t changed much since its  2001 report.  Women face inadequate access to land tenure, credit and equipment, and  market opportunities remain limited.  In particular: - Men’s landholdings average almost three times the average of women’s  landholdings globally; fertiliser is more intensively applied on men’s plots; an  analysis of credit schemes in five African countries found that women  received less than a tenth of the credit received by men smallholders. - In most developing countries, rural women’s triple responsibilities - farm  work, household chores and earning cash - often add up to a 16-hour  workday.  Women continue to lack access to important infrastructure services  and appropriate technologies to ease their workloads. - Women-owned businesses receive far fewer services and far less support  than those owned by men.  In Uganda, women’s enterprises face substantially  higher barriers to entry, although those that exist are generally at least as  productive and efficient in terms of value added per worker.  In Guatemala,  women hold only 3 percent of snow pea production contracts but contribute  more than a-third of total field labour and virtually all processing labour.   