'And what about after 2012?', when the Kyoto Protocol climate  change treaty’s first period of commitments ends, was the  question floating around an international meeting of  legislators held over the weekend in the Mexican capital. The members of the Global Legislators Organisation for a  Balanced Environment (GLOBE) do not want to be mere  spectators, but are seeking an active role in the  construction of an architecture for a post-2012 agreement  that would serve as a bridge between the two positions that  have prevailed so far in the battle against global warming. On one hand is the stance taken by industrialised nations,  whose commitments fall short, and on the other hand is the  developing world’s insistence on its right to grow and  develop, and its complaints about limits imposed by the  planet’s powerful nations. The vice president of GLOBE, British member of parliament  Barry Gardiner, explained why the meeting was held in the  Mexican Congress rather than in the resort town of Cancún  where the 16th Conference of Parties (COP16) to the United  Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCC) is  running Nov.  29-Dec.  10. 'We’re politicians,' said Gardiner, who added that when the  climate change talks were at the point of collapse at COP15,  held late last year in Copenhagen, it was government leaders  who reached key decisions. 'That’s the role of legislators, to hold governments  accountable, to promote our legislative principles for  climate change legislation at national level,' he said.  'We  have a key role in ratifying any accord, navigating over  political realities in the countries. 'GLOBE, which represents lawmakers from the 16 major  economies -- the members of the G8 most powerful countries,  the European Parliament, Brazil, China, India, Indonesia,  Mexico, South Africa and South Korea -- was created in 1989  to facilitate dialogue on key environmental issues,  especially climate change. Delegations from Brazil, Britain, Canada, China, France,  Germany, Indonesia, Japan, Mexico, South Africa, South Korea  and the European Parliament met Saturday and Sunday in the  Mexican Congress to discuss the challenges of reaching a new  climate change agreement. On the first day of debate, there was heavy criticism of the  lack of environmental commitment by the United States, whose  legislators did not show up for the GLOBE meeting. 'The United States has an unavoidable responsibility,'  Brazilian Senator Serys Slhessarenko told IPS, referring to  the world’s biggest polluter, which is not a signatory to  the Kyoto Protocol. 'What can be done about that? The public has to demand it,  create a major social movement and make governments  understand that they must make a commitment,' she said. With respect to the talks in Cancún, GLOBE proposes a way  forward that would be 'politically acceptable' to the major  economies: an agreement to keep the increase in global  temperatures below two degrees Celsius, and a post-Kyoto  second commitment period involving quantified targets and  commitments of financial and technological assistance to  developing countries for mitigation and adaptation. The Kyoto Protocol, signed in 1997 in the Japanese city that  gave the treaty its name and in force since 2005, obliges  the industrialised nations that have ratified it to reduce  their greenhouse gas emissions by 5. 2 percent by 2012, from  a 1990 baseline. The GLOBE document presented by the legislators in Mexico  also suggests a parallel agreement that would impose legally  binding commitments by the leading developing countries,  like China, India and Brazil, and would involve a key role  for parliaments in overseeing, verifying and setting  national and regional norms. Mexican Senator Yeidckol Polevnsky praised the delegates  from China for 'committing themselves to pushing for actions  aimed at cutting emissions and to supporting the economies  of other countries,' although she clarified that this is not  the position of the government. Polevnsky, of the left-wing opposition Party of the  Democratic Revolution (PRD), complained that legislators  were not accredited to take part in COP16. 'There is accreditation for government functionaries and  civil society organisations, but the COPs should provide a  space for legislators, who are neither part of the executive  branch nor civil society,' she told IPS. 'Everything governments want to do goes through the  legislatures.  No commitments are of any use unless they  become part of a legislative agreement,' she said. Slhessarenko, meanwhile, stressed that GLOBE is trying to  build solid alternative solutions for an agreement on  climate change that would protect life on the planet. 'There is a steadily growing understanding among countries  with regard to the environment and the need for agreements  among nations and for each country to live up to its  commitments,' she told IPS. The debate among the parliamentarians over the weekend  focused on financing for scientific projects and the  development of technologies to face the challenges of  climate change and on a kind of bridge between international  commitments and the design of national and regional laws. The representatives from Germany said their government is  willing to commit funds to that initiative and invited other  governments to do the same.  They stressed that it is the  role of political leaders to make sure the financing reaches  those who need it. Other issues discussed were how to restore forests on  degraded lands and the use of renewable technologies. In the opening session, PRD Congressman Porfirio Muñoz, the  chair of the international relations committee in Mexico’s  Chamber of Deputies, said the United Nations’ ability to  reach binding international decisions has long been weak in  many areas. 'The major political revelation in terms of climate change  is the lack of global governance,' he said. 'In the climate change discussions in Cancún, not all the  chips are on the table,' said Muñoz.  'And these chips are  the questions of disarmament, a new international financial  architecture, and a new energy mix.  If all of these things  were resolved, we wouldn’t be tormented with the struggle to  find funds to fight climate change. 'He also said the international Inter-Parliamentary Union has  been working on a climate change document sponsored by the  U. N.  and backed by 155 parliaments, which will be presented  to the ministers this week. The legislators concurred that Cancún would not be a  disaster like COP15 in Copenhagen, and said the flame would  be kept alive and that progress would be made towards  national and regional commitments that, although not  binding, would be replicable and verifiable. Wang Hungju, a member of the Environment and Resources  Protection Committee in China’s parliament, said increased  international cooperation and constructive policies were  needed. He said China’s legislators support all agreements aimed at  reducing emissions and facilitating the financing of  developing countries to that end. As one Mexican legislator remarked to his fellow party  members during a break in the meeting, 'the economic model  forgot about the environment, and now it has remembered, but  it doesn’t know what to do with it. ' 