'We want real compensation,' said Luis Nascimento de Freitas,  a fisherman from Vila Teotonio, a ramshackle town on the banks  of the Madeira River that will be flooded when the Santo  Antonio hydroelectric plant is completed. The consortium that built the dam is offering better housing  to the relocated families, or a lump sum in cash, he  acknowledged.  But he complained that they will not receive  sufficient indemnification for 'the loss of our sources of  income,' which are fishing and tourism. 'We natives are the only people who will be affected by  this; we’ll live in a beautiful house, but without any money  in our pockets,' he said. Freitas’s complaints reflect the conflicts generated by the  various dams under construction in the Amazon jungle in  Brazil and Peru.  Progress, which demands a steady increase  in energy, is destroying the traditional way of life and  habitat of indigenous people, small fisherfolk and other  riverbank peoples, and thus undermining biological and  cultural diversity. But the Santo Antonio Energía (SAE) consortium made up of  seven companies and investment funds, which won the contract  to build the hydroelectric plant, claims it is ushering in a  new socially responsible way of doing things in Brazil by  combining a huge infrastructure project with a boost to  social development and respect for the environment. The 104 families who lived on the banks of the river near  the Teotonio waterfalls were given the choice of a payment  of 69,000 dollars, on average, to buy a new house elsewhere  and make the transition to a new livelihood, or a home in a  new town built for them two kilometres away. The Vila Nova de Teotonio or 'New Teotonio Town' has 72  solid, colourfully painted prefabricated homes with large  yards, as well as a school, sports and recreational  facilities, and buildings where people who ran restaurants  and other businesses in the old community of rustic wooden  shacks can set up shop. But only 42 families moved in November to the new town,  where the idea is to replicate the fishing and culinary  traditions of the original Vila Teotonio, because in three  or four years, when the reservoir is full, its edge will be  near the new town.  Most of the families chose the cash  payment, and bought a home in the nearest city. 'But those who leave end up returning.  They spend the money  and then go back to fishing; they don’t know how to do  anything else,' said José dos Santos who, due to 'family  pressure,' bought a house in Porto Velho, the nearby capital  of the western Brazilian Amazon jungle state of Rondonia. 'I was born here and I have always lived here; now I’ll have  to find another business,' said the fisherman, who owns two  boats he uses to take tourists out fishing. The dam will affect a total of 1,175 rural and 504 urban  families, who are in the process of resettlement and  indemnification.  Nearly one-quarter of them are demanding  more compensation and are still negotiating, organised in  the Movement of People Affected by Dams (MAB). MAB, which was just recently recognised as a valid  interlocutor in the relocation process, estimates that more  than one million families have been forced from their homes  as a result of the construction of dams in Brazil and that  in the case of 70 percent of the families, their rights were  not respected. But things have changed, as treatment of families displaced  by dams has improved.  The disregard of their rights that was  rampant in the past is inconceivable today, because the  process of environmental approval of infrastructure projects  requires adequate resettlement and compensation for people  who are relocated, and the costs are factored into the  budget from the start. The Santo Antonio hydroelectric plant has to carry out 28  programmes to mitigate or compensate for environmental and  social impacts, as a requisite for its construction and  future operation.  Critics of the strict environmental and  social requirements complain that they have helped drive up  the price of energy in Brazil. Despite fears that construction of Santo Antonio and Jirau,  another large dam being built 120 km upstream on the Madeira  River, would cause major problems among local residents,  there have been no outbreaks of malaria, and no major influx  of people into the city of Porto Velho, 10 km from Santo  Antonio, has occurred since the two dams began to be built  two years ago.  (Construction is one-third complete. )On the contrary, 'there has been a major reduction in  malaria cases' in the Santo Antonio dam’s areas of direct  impact, said Jose Carlos de Sá, an institutional relations  analyst in the company.  He attributed that to the  hydroelectric firm’s prevention programme, which included  the distribution of more than 14,000 insecticide-treated  mosquito nets to local residents and other equipment to the  municipal government. Last year, 19,950 cases of malaria were diagnosed in Porto  Velho, 13 percent down from the number of cases registered  in 2008, according to the municipal health secretariat.  And  preliminary data from this year point to a continued  downward trend. But 'it cannot be claimed that this result was due to the  work on Santo Antonio,' said Tony Katsuragawa, head of  epidemiology in the Tropical Pathologies Research Institute (IPEPATRO).  In fact, the prevalence of malaria has been declining  throughout the Amazon jungle region since 2005, the  biologist said.  Although the cause of that decline has not  been proven, it apparently includes a combination of factors  such as deforestation and longer periods of low water, he  added. Furthermore, the month-to-month figures kept by the Health  Ministry’s epidemiological surveillance system show that the  number of cases in some parts of the municipality of Porto  Velho has actually risen since 2008, when construction of  the Santo Antonio dam began, he said.  It’s true that the 'explosion of cases' predicted as a  result of a growing conglomeration of people along the banks  of the river did not occur, Katsuragawa acknowledged.  While  researchers had predicted that as many as 100,000 people  would be drawn to Porto Velho, which has a population of  425,000, by the construction of the hydroelectric plant,  only 40,000 people came, according to the municipal  government. But the prevalence of malaria has changed all around the  country, and the real test will come when the reservoir is  filled, which will increase the areas suitable for the  breeding of the mosquito that carries the disease. The effects of the arrival of tens of thousands of people in  the area have been felt in the rise in rents and home prices  and in the shortage of schools.  But with the hydroelectric  project offering nearly 30,000 direct jobs and drawing large  companies to the city, unemployment has not gone up. Around 85 percent of those hired for the Santo Antonio  project are long-time local residents, said Eduardo Bezerra,  an institutional relations officer at Odebrecht, the  construction company that leads the consortium.  The initial  goal had been to hire 30 percent local labour. To train local workers, Odebrecht set up the Acreditar  (Believe) programme in Porto Velho, which has now been  expanded to other cities and has provided free training in  trades like bricklayer, carpenter, electrician, welder and  plumber to 54,000 adults and young people around Brazil. The Santo Antonio plant will also be the first large  Brazilian dam to use bulb turbines, which need a smaller  reservoir and thus reduce the area flooded, causing fewer  environmental impacts. But advances like the training programme and the use of bulb  turbines do not redeem the 'sins' of blocking a major Amazon  rainforest river: destroying ecosystems, biodiversity and  the lives of thousands of people to enrich construction  companies and energy-guzzling industries, according to  environmentalists like Telma Monteiro, head of the Kanindé  Ethno-environmental Defence Association. The activist said the company’s claims of hiring such a high  proportion of local workers 'are not true,' because the  consortiums subcontract companies that bring their own  employees in from outside.  She also said the firms building  the two dams on the Madeira River violate laws by modifying  the projects after they have been approved, without carrying  out new environmental impact studies.  