What some people view as modest but real progress in the  climate change talks, now in their second week in this  southeastern Mexican resort city, others see as no more than  smokescreens or 'false solutions. 'The Secretariat of the United Nations Framework Convention  on Climate Change (UNFCCC) announced three advances this  weekend.  The first is a 'near agreement' that carbon capture  and storage might be an eligible project activity under the  Kyoto Protocol's Clean Development Mechanism (CDM),  'provided it complies with stringent risk and safety  assessments. ' This involves capturing large volumes of carbon dioxide  (CO2), the main greenhouse gas responsible for global  warming, from the atmosphere and storing it in 'carbon  sinks', such as the oceans, forests or underground. Aside from planting and conserving forests, there are  several technologies for pumping atmospheric CO2 into the  subsoil or under the sea bed.  However, little research has  been done on them so far, and there are considerable risks. The CDM allows industrialised nations to partially offset  their greenhouse gas emissions by investing in clean energy  projects in developing countries. 'We regard carbon capture as a false solution,' Chilean  environmentalist Eduardo Giesen, Latin American co- coordinator of the Global Anti-Incinerator Alliance (GAIA)  and a member of Chile's Alliance for Climate Justice, told  TerraViva. 'This is no way to resolve the problem.  Instead of reducing  the amount of carbon dioxide released into the atmosphere,  the idea is to bury it, which only postpones the day of  reckoning,' he said.  Futhermore, the methods are associated  with 'a high degree of technological uncertainty. 'The agreement on this point will be presented this week to  ministers of the states party to the Convention, who are  arriving for high-level discussions at the 16th Conference  of the Parties to the UNFCCC (COP16), due to conclude Friday  Dec.  10. The first commitment period of the Kyoto Protocol for  mandatory greenhouse gas emission reductions expires in  2012.  Although that is not far off, the goals have not been  met, and humanity has no clear mechanism in sight to deal  with a global problem that is likely to be of cataclysmic  proportions, according to the scientific community. But the talks, at least as far as is publicly known, remain  bogged down over details. Another achievement at Cancún was a decision to broaden the  mandate of the Least Developed Countries (LDC) Expert Group  and extend it by five years.  The Group provides technical  guidance and advice to LDCs on programmes of mitigation and  adaptation to climate change.  A total of 45 countries have  already presented their plans, and 38 have begun to  implement them on the ground.  According to the Secretariat, the process has left 'a wealth  of capacity and awareness across the countries from  political levels down to community levels. ' In Giesen's view, the groups supporting the Convention are  promoting 'solutions of a corporate nature. ' In general,  strategies for adaptation in developing countries offer  solutions on an industrial scale, which benefits big  companies, he said. In contrast, 'developing world movements are calling for aid  to be directed to local communities, to increase the  resilience of the most vulnerable populations,' he said. That demand was expressed at a protest march held Sunday  Dec.  5 by Via Campesina, Friends of the Earth International  and the Grassroots Global Justice Alliance. As there are few hopeful expectations for the outcome of the  climate conference, Giesen said an acceptable outcome would  be agreement on a global fund to combat climate change,  'omitting the carbon market component. ' Implementation of  the fund could be left until the next COP.  It would also be  a good thing to keep negotiations open for reaching new  deals within the framework of the Kyoto Protocol, he said. The third achievement reported by the U. N.  was the decision  to strengthen education, training and public awareness on  climate change through increased funding for such  activities, 'and to engage civil society more strongly in  national decision-making and the U. N.  climate change  process. ' Expanding education and participation 'is positive, but it  should be more focused on solutions at the grassroots  level,' Giesen said. 'Citizen participation has always been part of the discourse  of the Convention,' but at national as well as international  levels it is 'rather vague, weak and non-binding,' he said,  adding that it would be 'fantastic' if the political will  existed to expand it. Lawmakers, for instance, do not have the status of COP  participants.  The Convention Secretariat does offer them  special accreditation, but their situation is still  unresolved because not all governments have given the green  light. Legislators can only come to the Cancún meeting if they have  been accredited as part of a government delegation, or as  'non-governmental organisations. ' But 'we are not NGOs,'  complained Barry Gardiner, a British member of parliament  who is also vice president of the Global Legislators  Organisation for a Balanced Environment (GLOBE).  GLOBE, whose members include lawmakers from the 16 largest  world economies, held a forum Dec.  4-5 in Mexico City with  an agenda designed to solve the problems of climate change  at the national level, by means of legislation and checks on  executive powers.   Proposals from the GLOBE forum are to be presented Tuesday  to Mexican President Felipe Calderón. Meanwhile at the climate conference, the president of COP16,  Mexican Foreign Minister Patricia Espinosa, said that the  pre-agreements achieved 'clearly show that countries have  come to Cancun to negotiate in good faith. ' But in Gardiner's view the sum total of progress achieved  amounts to 'next to nothing. ' We have been ignoring the camels, but straining gnats  instead, he told TerraViva.  (*This story appears in the IPS TerraViva online published  for the U. N.  Conference on Climate Change in Cancún. ) 