As the World Bank returns to the big dam business with the  inauguration of Laos’ largest hydropower project, it is coming  under the scrutiny of familiar adversaries: green groups and  grassroots activists.    On the eve of the Dec.  9 ceremony to celebrate the Nam  Theun Two (NT2) hydropower project in the landlocked  country, a coalition of activists fired a letter to the  Bank’s president, Robert Zoellick, citing social and  environmental troubles that have surfaced with the building  of NT2.    'More than 6,200 ethnic minority people relocated by the  project are still struggling to achieve sustainable  livelihoods three years after they lost access to their  natural resources such as paddy fields, swidden fields,  forests and grazing lands,' argued the letter signed by 34  civil society groups and individuals from 18 countries.    The activists also drew attention to the plight of over  110,000 people living in 71 riverside villages and 101  hinterland villages who face risks due to changes to the  river ecosystem.  'Impacts on the downstream areas include  flooding, decline of fisheries, riverbank erosion, flooding  of riverbank gardens, ecosystem changes along the river and  poor water quality,' the letter revealed.    The letter to Zoellick — which was also addressed to  Haruhiko Kuroda, president of the Manila-based Asian  Development Bank (AsDB) — stems from the World Bank’s  decision to provide a security guarantee to the Nam Theun  Two Power Co, which has French, Thai and Lao shareholders.    The Bank’s decision to endorse the 1. 5 billion U. S.   dollar private sector project in Laos, one of South-east  Asia’s poorest countries, marked its return to the big dam  industry following a lengthy hiatus.  This break came in the  wake of criticism that the Washington D. C. -based development  funder received in the 2000 World Commission on Dams report,  which said that its push for building large dams across the  developing world has left a trail of social and  environmental woes.    In fact, the Bank billed NT2 as a showpiece of its new  thinking: the ability to support sustainable hydropower  ventures.    'Nam Theun Two is an example of how hydropower can help  support development in an economically, environmentally and  socially sustainable way,' says Keiko Miwa, the Bank’s Laos  country manager.  'Our engagement in hydropower and hydraulic  infrastructure is an integral part of the World Bank’s  approach to development, all the more so in a world with 1. 5  billion people lacking access to electricity and one where  the impact of climate change is increasingly being felt. '   To strengthen its credentials, the Bank is highlighting  the financial windfall that will boost the economic fortunes  of Laos, a third of whose 5. 8 million people live below the  poverty line.  Since the NT2’s turbines came to life in March  this year, the Lao government has earned 5. 6 million U. S.   dollars from electricity sales to Thailand, Miwa told IPS in  an e-mail interview.    '(The Laotian government’s revenue is) being budgeted at  around 10 million U. S.  dollars for the coming year,' she  added.  'They will average around 80 million U. S.  dollars per  annum over the 25-year concession period. '   The foreign exchange earned from NT2, with its 39-metre  high dam and output of 1,000 megawatts of power, has been  channelled to education, health and rural infrastructure  projects.  Two million U. S.  dollars have been spent on  education in poor districts, 1. 7 million dollars on rural  roads and one million dollars on public health projects,  reveals the Bank.    This sale of electricity to Thailand is part of  Vientiane’s blueprint to lift the country out of poverty by  becoming the 'battery of South-east Asia. ' The country’s  mountainous terrain and artery of rivers have already seen  plans being developed for 12 more large dams to export power  to its energy-hungry neighbours, including Vietnam.    It is a scenario that has placed the Bank and civil  society activists at odds, even though most of the planned  large dam projects are backed by corporate investors from  Thailand, China and Vietnam, rather than the Bank.    The Bank had hoped that the spree of planned dams in Laos  would follow the 'sustainable hydropower' model it offered  through NT2.  'The Lao Government should look for ways to  apply lessons learnt from NT2 to other hydropower projects  in the country,' says Miwa.  'Some of the lessons from NT2  should be how governments, private sector developers and the  World Bank could work together to achieve similar quality  results. '   But the reality is otherwise, warn activists, worried  that the dams being built in Laos will serve as a template  for a big dam culture led by private sector investors with  little interest in the environmental and social impact of  these projects.    Three dams backed by the private sector in Laos are being  built without disclosing their environment impact  assessments (EIA), reveals Ikuko Matsumoto, Laos programme  director for International Rivers, a global environmental  lobby based in the U. S.  city of Berkeley.  'These dam  builders are ignoring the sustainable model the World Bank  said it was promoting with NT2. '   'It seems hard for the World Bank to say something to  these private sector investors even though the Bank had  declared it wanted to strengthen hydropower sector standards  in Laos,' Matsumoto said in an interview.  'These dam  builders are also ignoring the concerns of NGOs (non- governmental organisations). ' 