The main cause of climate change is the burning of fossil  fuels, so why are billions of dollars being invested to find  and produce more oil, coal and natural gas?  That is the question posed by Canadian indigenous  representatives at the alternative civil society meet,  Klimaforum, held parallel to the United Nations-sponsored  climate summit under way in the Mexican resort city of  Cancún. 'Canada's tar sands project emits 40 million tonnes of  carbon every year, with ambitious growth plans pushing that  to nearly 140 million tonnes by 2020.  The entire country of  Denmark emits just 52 million tonnes,' said Melina Laboucan- Massimo.  The activist comes from the Lake Lubicon Cree band of First  Nations in the province of Alberta, where thousands of  square kilometres of tar-laden soil and sands underlying  pristine boreal forests and marshes are being mined.  Canada is not being censured for this flagrant disregard for  the global climate at the 16th Conference of Parties (COP  16) to the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change, she  said.  The nearly 200 national delegations gathered for COP 16  (Nov.  29-Dec.  10) aim to stabilise emissions of greenhouse- effect gases to prevent climate change, but there is little  hope of success.  In fact, at the Cancún summit no country is being challenged  for expanding operations of oil, coal or natural gas or  looking for new deposits. Burning just one-quarter of the proven reserves of oil, gas  and coal will push the global climate beyond the two degrees  Celsius of average warming, scientists have predicted.    'We shouldn't forget that a two-degree global mean warming  would take us far beyond the natural temperature variations  that life on Earth has experienced since we humans have been  around,' Malte Meinshausen, climate researcher at Germany's  Potsdam Institute for Climate Impact Research, told  Tierramérica in an interview last year. According to Laboucan-Massimo, also an activist with  Greenpeace Canada, 'There is no investment in solar energy  in Alberta, the region of Canada with the most sunshine. '  She spoke to a small group of activists and members of the  public this week under a nylon awning at El Rey Polo Country  Club, outside Cancún. The gathering was part of the Klimaforum, civil society's  alternative summit 'to promote and debate true sustainable  and socially just solutions to climate change. ' Held in the middle of the coastal jungle, 20 km from the COP  16 official negotiations, there were in fact polo players  mounted on horseback galloping across a huge field while  Laboucan-Massimo told people about the impacts of the  world's most capital-intensive project.  Not only is Alberta's tar-sands mining the world's biggest  industrial project, it is the most destructive and wasteful,  with carbon emissions three to five times higher than  conventional oil production, said Laboucan-Massimo.  Millions of litres of fresh water are boiled, using natural  gas, in order extract the tar from the soil.  That water is  so contaminated that it kills birds when they land in the  wastewater-lakes, which cover more than 50 square km, she  said.  'It's insane.  It is really scary to see how much the land  has changed in my lifetime, and I'm not even 30 years old,'  said the Canadian activist. Most of the 2. 7 million barrels of oil produced each day  from the tar sands goes to the United States.  That is why  both Canada and the U. S.  have lobbied other countries to  prevent a moratorium on fossil fuel expansion from coming up  at these meetings, said Clayton Muller-Thomas, of the  Mathias Colomb Cree Nation in northern Canada and organiser  at the Indigenous Environmental Network.   'They and other industrialised countries prefer techno-fixes  like REDD (Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and Forest  Degradation), biochar and carbon capture and storage rather  than real reductions in emissions,' Muller-Thomas told  Tierramérica.  If the REDD mechanism is approved, the wealthier nations can  pay to conserve forests in tropical regions as a way to  offset their own greenhouse gas emissions. The rich countries would then obtain carbon credits that  would help them achieve their emissions reduction targets  set out in the Kyoto Protocol. 'These market-based mitigation mechanisms are highly  alarming to indigenous peoples,' said Thomas-Muller.  Such strategies are 'false solutions' to the problem of  climate change, and threaten the rights, lands and cultures  of indigenous peoples who have been asking for a moratorium,  he said. If most people are against the privatisation of water, why  would we agree to the privatisation of the atmosphere  through carbon markets, he asked.  Bolivia tried to bring a proposal for a moratorium to  Cancún, along with other parts of the Cochabamba 'People's  Agreement' that came out of a gathering in that Bolivian  city last April.  Known as the World Peoples Conference on  Climate Change and the Rights of Mother Earth, it drew some  35,000 participants from around the globe.  At that meet, the participants agreed to call for an oil  moratorium and for governments of the world to recognise the  rights of Mother Earth.  The key aspects of the Cochabamba  platform were included in the texts for negotiating a new  binding agreement, but set apart in brackets, as were so  many other items about which consensus has not been reached.  However, the COP 16 chair, Mexico's Foreign Minister  Patricia Espinosa, submitted a draft proposal to the  negotiators in Cancún that excluded the Cochabamba issues. In reaction to a complaint from Bolivia it was reported that  the text was her personal initiative and not the official  text for the negotiations, but it was enough to prompt this  response from Thomas-Muller: 'It's business as usual here at  the COP 16. 'It is also business as usual for energy giant British  Petroleum (BP), which announced last week it will proceed  with its first project in Canada's tar sands.  BP, the company responsible for the massive oil spill this  year in the Gulf of Mexico, along with a Chinese-owned  partner hopes to extract 3 billion barrels of oil through  their massive Sunrise project.  More than 3 billion dollars  is to be invested to get the oil out within three years. 'If we burn the oil from the tar sands we have little chance  of preventing runaway climate catastrophe,' said Jess Worth,  an activist with the UK Tar Sands Network. 'BP knows this, but it doesn't care,' Worth said in a  statement. (*This story was originally published by Latin American  newspapers that are part of the Tierramérica network.   Tierramérica is a specialised news service produced by IPS  with the backing of the United Nations Development  Programme, United Nations Environment Programme and the  World Bank. ) 