Africa will be amongst the hardest hit regions of the world as  the climate heats up, threatening the continent's food  security, experts agree.  If global temperatures rise 2. 0  degrees C, southern Africa will warm an additional 1. 5 degrees  to a 3. 5-degree increase on average. Such temperatures could be reached as early as 2035.  The  Hadley Centre for Climate Prediction and Research in Britain  recently advised that a 4. 0-degree C rise in the global  average temperature could be reached as soon as 2060 if the  ever-increasing emissions of carbon dioxide and other  greenhouse gases are not curbed. 'The prognosis for agriculture and food security in SSA  (Sub-Saharan Africa) in a 4°C+ world is bleak,' write the  authors of a special issue of the Philosophical Transactions  of the Royal Society to be published next month. 'A four-degree C world would be horrendous and must be  avoided at all costs,' said Philip Thornton of the  International Livestock Research Institute in Nairobi, Kenya  and co-author of a paper in the Royal Society special issue  'Four degrees and beyond'. 'This special issue is a call to action so we can avoid such  a future,' Thornton told TerraViva. Even if a new climate treaty came out of the final week of  the 16th meeting of the Conference of Parties (COP) of the  U. N.  Framework Convention on Climate Change in Cancún, 2. 0  degrees C looks inevitable, he said.  No one is realistically  expecting a comprehensive climate treaty for several years.   This means southern Africa can expect to be 3. 5 degrees C  hotter and much drier in future, he said. 'It is going to get very difficult for rain-fed agriculture  in this region,' Thornton warned. Even 2. 0 degrees C would be devastating for South Africa,  Zimbabwe, Botswana and other neighbouring countries, said  Lance Greyling a member of South Africa's parliament. 'We can't have more than 1. 5 degrees C globally and that has  been Africa's position since Copenhagen COP,' Greyling said  in an interview in Mexico City at the Globe International  forum on climate change. Water is a huge constraint on South Africa's agriculture and  economy since 98 percent of freshwater resources are already  allocated, he said. A great deal of work will be needed to help farmers adapt to  these new conditions, including the development of heat and  drought-tolerant varieties, said Thornton.  Learning from  other regions with conditions similar to those expected in  southern Africa in the next 20 to 30 years, as well as  bringing seeds from those regions, has to be part of the  adaptation strategy. It also means that water-hungry crops like maize will need  to be replaced by cassava, millet and sorghum.  That involves  social change since local people largely prefer maize and  food preparation of those other crops is different and may  be more difficult, he said.  'It's a towering challenge,'  Thornton noted. Climate projections for the rest of sub-Saharan Africa are  less clear in a 2. 0 degrees-plus world.  Changes in seasons  and rainfall patterns have already been occurring for the  last 20 or 30 years.  That's expected to continue.  Higher  temperatures mean crops need more water, and projections for  precipitation, especially in dry regions, are that rainfall  will be similar or less abundant. More importantly, rain will likely occur in fewer events  with longer dry periods between, making agriculture very  difficult as the planet heats up. The paper concludes that the cost of reaching the Millennium  Development Goal on food security - halving the proportion  of hungry people by 2015 - in a +2°C world will be around  $40—$60 billion per year.  'Without this investment, serious  damage from climate change will not be avoided,' it said. By 2050, countries in the Sahel, the region south the Sahara  desert, will experience crop-growing conditions for which  there are no current analogues globally, said Sonja  Vermeulen, deputy director for research at the Programme on  Climate Change, Agriculture and Food Security launched last  week in Cancún. This is a 10-year, $200 million research initiative cope  with climate change impacts on agriculture.  It hopes to  reduce poverty by 10 percent in targeted regions and lower  the number of rural people who are malnourished by 25  percent by 2020. Those unprecedented climate conditions make it difficult if  not impossible to grow food.  There may be no possibility of  adaptation without significant outside resources, Vermeulen  said in a statement. The mounting hazards of climate change are beyond the  'current coping range' of either local communities or  national institutions, agreed Janice Jiggins of the  Wageningen University and Research Centre in The  Netherlands.  Africa's losses could in theory be offset by  gains in productivity in more northern regions like Canada  and Russia — however, counting on that is a very risky  strategy, she said. 'We cannot rely on redistribution of resources via trade as  an 'adaptive mechanism',' Jiggins told TerraViva. Previous studies have shown that under 2. 0 degrees of  warming, global grain prices will likely double by 2050, if  not before.  An additional 25 million more children could be  malnourished, said Gerald Nelson, a researcher at the  International Food Policy Research Institute in Washington. Those studies only looked at changes in temperatures and  precipitation and 'the month to month variations were  dramatic', Nelson told TerraViva.  The impacts on livestock  have yet to be incorporated.  If temperatures continue to  rise by 3. 0 and 4. 0 degrees, it will be very hard to do  anything to adapt in many parts of the world, he said. Even with a +2 degrees C hotter world, the real scale of the  problem of food security in Africa has been heavily  underestimated and will require massive investments,  Thornton concluded. 'It is completely unfair that Africa is not really  responsible for the problem, and yet the greatest burden  falls on their agriculture sector,' he said.  'The last thing  Africa needed was climate change. '