The economies of Latin America are caught on the horns of a  dilemma: how to reduce their carbon consumption without  sacrificing economic and social development.  Subsidies for the  development of renewable energies and for learning new  technologies need to be increased urgently, experts say.  'The basic idea is to generate economic growth with social  inclusion and a low-carbon path, with regulations and  subsidies for alternative energies,' Mexican economist Luis  Galindo, the coordinator of a study for the Economic  Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC) on  low-carbon development in Mexico, told TerraViva. Mexico annually pours into the atmosphere 715. 2 million  tonnes of carbon dioxide (CO2), the main greenhouse gas  responsible for global warming, according to the national  inventory compiled in 2006.  Of the total amount of CO2  emitted, 61 percent is from energy generation, 22 percent  from industry and 14 percent from deforestation. Electricity generation, which is based mainly on fossil  fuels, is responsible for some 114 million tonnes of CO2 a  year. Chile, a smaller country, pumps 95 million tonnes of CO2  into the atmosphere every year, 85 percent of which is  produced by the energy industry, according to the study  titled 'The Economics of Climate Change in Chile',  coordinated by ECLAC. 'What happens in Latin America has a significant impact on  the rest of the world,' British economist Nicholas Stern  told IPS.  'What matters is not only reducing emissions, but  also making progress on adaptation.  Taxes on carbon, as well  as carbon credit markets, can be created in different  combinations for different economic sectors. ' Stern is the author of the world's first major global report  on the economic effects of global warming, published in  2006, which has been replicated at the national level in  countries like Australia, Chile and Mexico. Galindo and Stern are in Cancún attending the 16th  Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework  Convention on Climate Change (COP16), which opened Monday  Nov.  29 in this southeastern Mexican city and will wind up  Friday Dec.  10. One of the central issues being discussed at COP16 is how to  reduce an economy's carbon footprint, a challenge that  basically revolves around energy production and consumption. 'The Economics of Climate Change in Mexico', of which  Galindo is the lead author, predicts energy use will grow at  a rate of 2. 4 percent per year from 2008 to 2100.  It admits  that price adjustment and a slight fall in consumption will  not be enough to check rising demand. Countries like Mexico spend millions of dollars of public  funds on subsidies for wasteful consumption of water,  electricity and gasoline, according to a number of studies. For example, over two billion dollars are spent each year on  fuel subsidies, while Mexican President Felipe Calderón  announced that the budget of the country's Special Climate  Change Programme 2009-2012 (PECC) will be approximately 1. 3  billion dollars this year. Global CO2 emissions amount to some 48 billion tonnes a  year, and at an economic growth rate of zero, they would  have to decline to 44 billion tonnes in 10 years, and be  sharply reduced to 20 billion tonnes by 2050, in order to  avoid the worst consequences of climate change, according to  Stern's estimates.  The world average should be no more than  two tonnes per capita, he said. 'We have a very backward and politicised economy based on  primary products, which makes it difficult to adopt  appropriate policies,' Boris Graizbord, who coordinates the  Advanced Studies Programme on Sustainable Development and  Environment at the public El Colegio de México, told  TerraViva at Cancún. The consequences of climate change could absorb six percent  of Mexican GDP per year until 2100, if measures are not  taken to mitigate and adapt to its effects, according to the  ECLAC study, which was commissioned by the Finance Ministry  and the Environment and Natural Resources Ministry  (SEMARNAT). In the case of Chile, the figure is likely to be 1. 1 percent  of annual GDP until 2100, according to ECLAC's projections. 'There is a significant relationship between per capita  energy consumption and carbon emissions per person, and  between energy consumption per person and per capita income.   Economic growth implies higher energy consumption and more  greenhouse gas emissions,' said Galindo, an academic at the  state National Autonomous University of Mexico. Per capita greenhouse gas emissions in Mexico are set to  increase sharply from 2040, while Chile's emissions are  expected to soar to 233 million tonnes by 2030, an average  of 11. 9 tonnes a year per person. Mexico has committed itself to cutting its emissions by 50  million tonnes a year up to 2012, but has only achieved 42  percent of this goal, according to SEMARNAT. 'All countries must stop subsidising fossil fuels.  It makes  much more sense to use those funds to encourage renewable  energies and the acquisition of new technologies.  Besides  this, the errors of the market must be corrected,' Stern  recommended. The Mexican government has instituted programmes to exchange  refrigerators and water heaters for gas-fired appliances,  and substitute ordinary light bulbs for low-energy, long- life bulbs, to promote energy efficiency and savings. The ECLAC report on Mexico recommends reviewing government  subsidies for gasoline, water and electricity; making the  transition towards less polluting economic growth; and  creating a national carbon credit market. 'The state oil company, Petróleos Mexicanos (PEMEX), and the  Federal Electricity Commission must be compelled to develop  sustainable strategies,' Graizbord said.  Both these  monopolies have a direct influence on CO2 emissions. ECLAC is cooperating with Chile to produce a study on the  low-carbon economy, and with Argentina to measure the impact  of climate change on the economy. * This story appears in the IPS TerraViva online published  for the U. N.  Conference on Climate Change in Cancún.   