The short-cuts that the United Nations system is offering  companies to profit from strategies against global warming  were the target of loud protests on the Day of Action for  Climate Justice. Two separate demonstrations, of thousands of people each,  were held Tuesday as the climate change summit that ends  Friday in the southeastern Mexican resort town of Cancún  enters the final stretch. One of the protesters’ slogans, 'País petrolero, el pueblo  sin dinero' (In this oil-producing country, people have no  money), referring to Mexico, underscored the main cause of  the heating up of the planet: the burning of fossil fuels, a  question that has been practically sidelined in the talks at  the 16th Conference of Parties to the United Nations  Framework Convention on Climate Change (COP16). The day began with a march through the centre of the city by  rural and anti-globalisation movements from Mexico and other  countries of Latin America, meeting in the Diálogo  Climático-Espacio Mexicano (Mexican Space for Climate  Dialogue).  Accompanied by activists from Oxfam and the  Hemispheric Social Alliance, they marched down López  Portillo avenue to city hall. Profit-generating policies and programmes, like selling  surplus rights to emit carbon dioxide into the atmosphere as  part of the so-called carbon market, could be expanded in  Cancún. There is a 'near agreement' to include carbon capture and  storage under the Kyoto Protocol's Clean Development  Mechanism, and the Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and  Forest Degradation (REDD) programme, under discussion in the  COP16, could include market incentives. But the protesters changed 'REDD no, REDD no, REDD no'. In both marches, labour and indigenous organisations  outnumbered and out-mobilised the environmentalists.  And  their demands and slogans were also broad: ranging from food  sovereignty and human rights to protests against the  government of conservative Mexican President Felipe  Calderón.  'Let’s be tough on that gang that has gathered in Cancún to  enslave humanity and ruin the planet,' shouted one Mexican  demonstrator with his face partially covered by a mask  bearing the logo of the Nestle food corporation. Less radical, Oxfam activists wore T-shirts reading 'Cancún  can' on the front and 'From small seeds in Cancún, big  things can grow' on the back. What is it that Cancún can do? 'We think the conference in  Cancun can deliver not just confidence and trust between  governments but also between citizens,' Antonio Hill, senior  climate change policy adviser at Oxfam in Latin America and  the Caribbean, told TerraViva in the march. 'After the disappointment of (the late 2009 COP15 in)  Copenhagen we need more than just these talks: we need  results that deliver concrete benefits, especially for the  communities that are the most vulnerable around the world  and those that are already suffering' from climate  disasters, Hill said. The governments 'delayed the process in Copenhagen, but they  certainly didn’t delay climate change.  This year we saw 20  million affected by floods in Pakistan, since August one to  two million people in Colombia are living with water just  above their waist, and just yesterday (Monday) 120 people  died in landslides and the stories are the same' all over  the world, he added. 'Cancún can deliver…a fund that can prioritise adaptation  and where at least half of the money goes to dealing with  climate change impacts that already inevitable,' Hill said. But some organisations warn that such a fund could also be  co-opted by the financial and private sectors. 'I think what is clear is that the richest countries are  trying to find ways to escape obligations they have to  deliver public funds,' Hill added. What really stands out, Colombian activist Enrique Daza,  secretary of the Hemispheric Social Alliance, told  TerraViva, was 'the generosity and alacrity to make hundreds  of billions of dollars available to bail out the financial  systems' compared to the 'stinginess' when it comes to  making funds available for combating climate change. 'They are fighting for every dollar here,' he said,  referring to the negotiations over funds for adaptation to  climate change. 'Little can be expected from international conferences on  any issue…the paralysis of the multilateral system' is  obvious, Daza said. So how can change happen? 'Not like this.  Strong social  pressure is needed' and 'it is our responsibility, as social  movements,' to mobilise people, he said. 'There’s no justice in these talks,' said a young activist  with the Philippines  Movement for Climate Justice who identified herself simply  as Virgi. The United States is trying to impose itself 'in many  issues,' such as 'the imposition that the World Bank should  manage climate change funds.  Certainly we don’t want the  World Bank to be in charge because it has in the past  financed dirty energy projects that have had effects on the  climate and added to emissions,' she told TerraViva. With songs and Bolivian instruments and improvised reggae  beats, the bigger demonstration led by the Via Campesina  international small farmers movement marched along Tulum  avenue towards the outskirts of the city, with the aim of  reaching the Moon Palace, the hotel complex that is serving  as the venue for the COP16 talks. But dozens of police decked out in full riot gear blocked  the road in front of metal barricades, while a helicopter  buzzed overhead. Peasant farmers and indigenous people from Latin America and  the United States, Mexican human rights groups and radical  leftist movements, and representatives of organisations like  Friends of the Earth marched under the midday sun, chanting  slogans like 'Time is running out and nothing is being done  here'. The words of European Commissioner for Climate Action Connie  Hedegaard sounded like a response at the start of the high- level segment of COP16. 'Over the last years we have managed to mobilise the whole  world and get people from around the planet to acknowledge  the urgency of this challenge.  Seeing the pictures of palm  trees and beautiful beaches, how would they judge us -- the  governments of the world -- if we left Cancun empty-handed?''We owe it to them to deliver…We still have 72 hours to do  it. '*With additional reporting by Rosebell Kagumire. 