While a global agreement to fight the climate crisis may be  off the table for now, many activists and experts are focusing  on options for mitigating climate-changing gas emissions and  the impacts of increasingly extreme weather.  One such  alternative is bamboo. Bamboo grows quickly, needs little water, absorbs carbon  dioxide, protects estuaries and can withstand storms.  This  is the list that Dutch activist Coosje Hoogendoorn, head of  the Beijing-based International Network for Bamboo and  Rattan (INBAR), enumerated for Tierramérica. There are more than 1,000 species of bamboo, and 34 percent  of them grow in Latin America.  Mexico alone has 36 species,  but they have gone unstudied and under-utilised.  The fibre from bamboo stalks is a good raw material for  utensils, furniture and crafts, and has proven effective in  the construction of hurricane-resistant housing. 'In Latin America, bamboo's potential is being developed  little by little.  There is not much known about its use,'  Ecuadorian Álvaro Cabrera, INBAR's regional coordinator for  Latin America and the Caribbean, told Tierramérica. The 16th Conference of Parties (COP 16) to the United  Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, under way in  the Mexican resort city of Cancún until Dec.  10, is immersed  in discussions aimed at technical options for protecting and  restoring ecosystems and adapting to the effects of global  warming, including more frequent and intense weather  disasters. Bamboo is already used to build houses in the southern  Mexican states of Puebla and Veracruz, although it is not a  widespread technique.  Mexico is not among INBAR's 35 member  countries. The limited use of the native bamboo species in Mexico has  'historic, cultural and economic reasons,' according to the  report 'Bamboo: Study of the Global Market,' by Mexico's  Ministry of Agriculture. People scorn the plant, and it is considered a pest,  particularly in areas where coffee, banana, tobacco and  cocoa are grown, or where there is extensive cattle  production, according to the report. In 10 years, one hectare of moso bamboo (Phyllostachys  pubescens) in China captures 30 tonnes more carbon dioxide - - the leading greenhouse gas -- than one hectare of China  fir trees (Cunninghamia lanceolata), according to a  comparative model from INBAR. 'Sustainable management and the appropriate use of bamboo  can increase the quantity of sequestered carbon through  changes in management that increase the storage capacity  within the ecosystem in the short term,' says the study. Bamboo forestry has gained ground in Colombia, Ecuador and  Peru, and more recently in Argentina -- all members of  INBAR, along with Cuba, Panama and Venezuela. Stephen Crooks, of the U. S. -based environmental management  firm ESA-PWA, said in a Tierramérica interview that while  development of innovative protection projects is essential,  they need to be properly evaluated.  Co-author of an analysis  of carbon sequestering in the planet's coastal zones, Crooks  said the potential effects of massive introduction of bamboo  must be analysed. In Ecuador, more than 100,000 bamboo homes were built to  restore areas devastated by heavy rains and flooding that  resulted from El Niño/Southern Oscillation, a cyclical  climate phenomenon that warms the surface waters of the  Pacific Ocean along the Equator, affecting weather patterns  in the region. In the southern Peruvian city of Ica, more than 40,000  bamboo poles were used to build the Paracas Hotel.  In the  northwestern Ecuadorian province of Esmeraldas, the U. S.   hotel chain Royal Decameron also used bamboo as a  construction material. INBAR is planning 15 prototypes of bamboo houses in Ecuador,  and will launch a similar initiative in Peru in January,  with 200,000 dollars in financing from the World Bank. The aim is that the governments of the two countries will  each finance the construction of 1,500 homes.  'We are  developing a technology to manufacture roofing from bamboo  instead of zinc,' said Hoogendoorn in Cancún. Ecuadorian and Peruvian bamboo growers obtained raw material  certification from the Forest Stewardship Council, which  guarantees that it was sustainably produced. According to the Mexican Ministry of Agriculture,  'Commercial bamboo crops are one of the options that could  more efficiently compensate and correct environmental  deterioration in territories with warm, humid climates and  with year-round rains. 'The Mexican Congress has asked President Felipe Calderón to  join INBAR and establish a bamboo development programme. 'In Mexico there is great interest in promoting the use of  bamboo,' said Cabrera.  On the international level, the  bamboo trade already reaches 7 billion dollars annually. (*This story was originally published by Latin American  newspapers that are part of the Tierramérica network.   Tierramérica is a specialised news service produced by IPS  with the backing of the United Nations Development  Programme, United Nations Environment Programme and the  World Bank. ) 