While negotiators in Cancún are struggling to make progress, there is something  interesting happening in the world.  And, it is good news.  Countries have started  to recognise and act upon the economic value in meeting the demand for green  technology. As a result there is a 'Green Race' emerging towards a more resource efficient  economy.  This presents huge opportunities for national and international  economies which are recognised not only by businesses but also by countries. More and more countries are taking note of this Green Race and are beginning  to participate with serious ambition.  Take for example the recent speech by  U. S.  Energy Secretary Steven Chu.  He labelled the success of China and other  countries in clean energy industries a new 'Sputnik Moment', which requires  the United States to mobilise its innovation machine to compete in the global  race for the jobs of the future. 'When it comes to innovation, Americans don’t take a back seat to anyone -  and we certainly won’t start now,' said Secretary Chu.  'From wind power to  nuclear reactors to high speed rail, China and other countries are moving  aggressively to capture the lead.  Given that challenge, and given the  enormous economic opportunities in clean energy, it’s time for America to do  what we do best: innovate. 'The European Union, under the direction of new Climate Commissioner  Connie Hedegaard, has also changed their approach to climate change.  They  are now putting forward the Green Race arguments - the EU should act on  climate change to protect its economic interests, jobs and economic growth.   This is a clear shift from the 'moral crusade' for global climate actions which  sidelined the EU at COP15 in Copenhagen. Leveraging New TechnologyDuring the next 40 years, global population is expected to increase to 9  billion.  According to the International Energy Agency (IEA), reducing carbon  emissions effectively will require investments in low-carbon technologies of  approximately 750 billion dollars per year by 2030, and more than 1. 6 trillion  dollars per year from 2030 to 2050. About 70 percent of the reductions needed could be achieved with existing  technologies, but there is also a requirement to create new technologies.  At  the current rate, global low-carbon technologies are not progressing fast  enough to keep up with the challenges of global climate change. With this urgency in mind I must admit to being somewhat puzzled to see that  in Cancún governments are debating a new international technology  mechanism to help transfer and deploy technologies to developing countries  and ignoring that a global solution already is in place - it’s called business. We develop, deploy and transfer technologies on a massive scale every day.   Governments should try to further our ability to do this rather than try to  replace or duplicate the work business is doing.  Current negotiations should  aim to enhance this system and to ensure that there are specific incentives  put in place so that the poorest countries can benefit from these investments. Trillions of dollars are needed to achieve the goals of emissions reductions  and stabilisation of the climate; nevertheless, it is not a lack of funds that is  holding investment back - but mobilising financing dollars into circulation. What Needs to HappenThe leading economies of the world have 'seen the writing on the wall' - if  they want to be a leading economy tomorrow, they must be able to supply  resource-efficient, non-polluting systems, products and services today. To succeed, a transformation of domestic markets is needed to build demand,  capabilities and scale.  This level of change can only be achieved in a new  partnership between governments and business.  Market forces alone are not  strong enough to achieve such massive transformation.  We need help from  supportive regulatory frameworks to stimulate demand for new products and  services. During COP 16, the World Business Council for Sustainable Development  (WBCSD) released a report titled 'Innovating for Green Growth: Drivers of  Private Sector RD&D'. The report demonstrates that the Green Race between countries and  companies offers significant opportunities for businesses to invest in the  fast-growing, low-carbon technology market.  It offers suggestions to  governments on how to leverage research, development and demonstration  (RD&D) to drive private sector investments. Focusing on these recommendations will help ensure acceleration of  innovative low-carbon technologies that will be the foundation of any global  agreement. Countries will ultimately determine the playing field, but they cannot achieve  success without business as the partner who provides the bulk of solutions.   That isn’t to say business can continue to sit idly by, the private sector has  been lacking in action as a result of the financial crisis.  When it’s given the  appropriate triggers, business must and will spring to life. *Björn Stigson is President of the World Business Council for Sustainable  Development.  This column is part of a series of opinion articles and interviews  about corporate social and environmental responsibility, supported by  Anheuser-Busch InBev. 