In countries around the world, small farmers are trapped in a  vicious circle - hard-pressed governments don't invest enough  money in local agriculture, and local producers find  themselves driven off their lands and into urban slums, where  they sink even deeper into poverty. This is doing nothing to ease the problem of global  malnutrition; worldwide, 925 million people continue to  suffer from chronic hunger, according to the latest figures  released in September by the United Nations Food and  Agriculture Organisation (FAO). Olivier de Schutter, the U. N.  Special Rapporteur on the  Right to Food, says the most sustainable solution is to  increase agricultural investments in developing countries,  thereby raising farmers' incomes and bringing greater  stability to the sector. De Schutter, who is independent from any government or  organisation, was appointed in May 2008 by the U. N.  Human  Rights Council based in Geneva.  Since then, he has visited  Nicaragua, Guatemala, Brazil, Benin and Syria. Excerpts from the interview follow. Q: How important is agriculture in the economies of  developing countries?  A: A number of developing countries rely too heavily on a  narrow range of raw commodities, such as cotton, coffee,  tea, tobacco or sugar.  This makes them very vulnerable to  price changes for these commodities, and it also means that  they have a tendency to overinvest in these export crops,  and to under-invest in producing for local consumption. That's the case for almost all Sub-Saharan African  countries.  I therefore encourage these countries to do two  things: First, to reinvest in domestic agriculture to feed  themselves, and be less vulnerable in the future to price  increases for their food security.  Second, to diversify  their economies, in order to develop a secondary (industry)  and tertiary (services) sector that can absorb the surplus  labour and diminish the dependency on a limited range of  export crops for their revenues. Q: Will increased agricultural productivity bolster the  economies of some of the poorest countries in Africa and  Asia?  A: Increases in agricultural productivity can be key if  these increases benefit small farmers, who are the poorest -  75 percent of global poverty is still in the rural areas.   Better incomes for these rural poor means that they will buy  more from local producers and service providers, with  important multiplier effects on the local rural economies  and also for the benefit of the manufacturing and services  sectors in the country concerned. Q: What kind of investments do you recommend?  A: Both public and private investments are needed.  States  simply do not have the budget required, many are cash- strapped.  But I would emphasise two points. Certain investments in public goods probably need to be done  by the state, because there is no - or only a weak -  incentive for the private sector to step in.  For instance,  states should develop extension services, rural  infrastructures and agricultural research.  They should  encourage farmer field schools and support the organisation  of farmers in cooperatives. As far as investment from the private sector is concerned,  it is important and can complement public investment.  But it  should not take the form of large-scale acquisitions or  leases or land, which can cause tremendous social and  political disruption and are a step backwards in improving  access to land for the poorest farmers, who are often poor  in part because they have too little land to cultivate. So what is the alternative? I believe certain forms of  contract farming can provide important benefits to the  farmers, allowing them to be supported by investments  without depriving them of access to their land.  At best, in  such a scheme, the buyer has a reliable source of supply,  the farmers have a reliable buyer for their crops, and the  land rights are left untouched. Q: How much, exactly, does agriculture need? And how much is  already invested? What is the shortfall?  A: It is estimated that, in order to relaunch agriculture in  Sub-Saharan Africa - and to make up for 30 years of neglect  - between $35 and $45 billion per year will be needed over a  period of five years (2010-2015).  That's more than has been  promised to date, and in fact, very little of the money that  has been promised has been in fact delivered. Q: What are some solutions to this lack of accountability?  A: The involvement of national parliaments and civil society  organisations, including farmers' organisations, can be very  important to ensure that governments will make decisions in  the areas of food and agriculture that are well informed,  based on an adequate understanding of the needs of the  poorest. I recommend the adoption of strategies that are developed in  participatory settings, and through which governments set  benchmarks for themselves within a specified timeframe, and  allocate responsibilities across various departments for the  adoption of the measures required to achieve these targets.   This increases the accountability of the government, since  it will have to justify not taking action and explain its  failure to comply with the goals it has set for itself. Q: Is food likely to be used as a weapon of war?  A: It can.  Interrupting the transport of food aid to war- torn zones under the pretext that this can support guerilla  troops in those zones, starving a population to punish it  for being hostile to the central government, or destroying  crops and thus depriving a population from its ability to  feed itself, are all serious human rights violations — in  some cases, they may constitute war crimes or crimes against  humanity. What, however, is more frequent, is the use of food as a  political tool - to reward your partisans while punishing  those who oppose you.  It is this, for instance, that Human  Rights Watch has alleged in a recent report on the use of  aid money in an Eastern African country, but that is not an  isolated example.  It is precisely against this kind of abuse  that the right to food, with its requirements of non- discrimination and accountability, should guard against. 