Environmental organisations in Bolivia are waging a crusade to  protect Madidi National Park against bids to tap into its  petroleum reserves, build hydroelectric dams and promote human  settlement in the country's largest nature preserve. With an area of nearly 1. 9 million hectares, Madidi extends  through the provinces of Iturralde and Franz Tamayo, in the  upper Amazon river basin of northwestern Bolivia.  Its  topography includes mountains standing 5,760 metres and  plains just 180 metres above sea level. The government's plan to obtain tax revenues from oil and  gas drilling and from economic development in the area has  been challenged by activists who favour the conservation of  the approximately 5,000 plant species and 1,370 animal  species found in the Madidi. Carmen Capriles, an expert in climate change, told IPS that  the three greatest threats to the nature preserve are the  construction of a highway within the park, drilling for oil,  and a planned hydroelectric dam. The immediate concerns include trafficking in wild animals,  the high rate of deforestation and the launch of a  government programme to colonise areas near water sources.   Capriles says these would have negative impacts on the  indigenous communities that rely on the rivers for food and  would lead to the inappropriate use of the zone's resources.   In 2009, Capriles visited the settlement known as El Tigre,  where she found that 80 percent of the population had  suffered leishmaniasis, a parasitic diseases transmitted by  sand flies.  She also collected testimonies about the  disappearance of wild animals resulting from unregulated  subsistence hunting.  But that is nothing compared to the impact the planned  settlements would have on the region, said the researcher. 'Up to 60 percent of the park's biodiversity could be  affected by the megaprojects,' which would alter the  ecosystems, watersheds and wildlife in general, Mirna  Fernández, coordinator of the Save the Madidi Campaign, told  IPS. The announced El Bala hydroelectric dam would flood much of  Madidi National Park and the adjacent biosphere reserve and  indigenous territory Pilón Lajas, destroying the landscape  and its biodiversity and forcing 17 indigenous communities  to leave the area, according to Fernández. Based on statements from residents of the park, the activist  denounced the initial steps being taken to carry out the  project, which the leftist government of President Evo  Morales declared a national priority in Decree 29191 in July  2007. Fernández is mostly worried about the oil exploration and  drilling authorised by the Morales government in 2007 for  the North Sub-Andean block, one of the two into which the  country has been divided for petroleum operations -- and  which includes the Madidi Park. Oil exploration would entail the construction of roads and  infrastructure, deforestation and biodiversity loss, human  settlements, contamination of water and soil, and increased  emissions of climate-changing gases, enumerated Fernández. 'We know that the government is firmly determined to drill  for petroleum in Madidi, because as President Morales said:  'I went to the Madidi and I saw that the petroleum is  pouring out',' Teresa Flores, vice-president of the  environmental defence group PRODENA, told IPS. 'The fact that there are emanations of petroleum does not  mean there is sufficient quantity to justify drilling,' she  said. Flores pointed out that the giant oil companies Total  (France) and Petrobrás (Brazil) had conducted seismic  explorations and then withdrew, 'because surely there was  not enough oil to make it worth the investment. 'Ricardo Coello, director of environmental monitoring for  Bolivia's National Protected Areas Service (SERNAP), told  IPS that so far seismic exploration has only taken place in  the Liquimuni field, adjacent to Madidi but outside the  park's border. He pointed out that Bolivia's Hydrocarbons Law requires  environmental impact studies before undertaking any  petroleum projects, and no such request has been made that  involves the park.  He also noted that according to the 2009  Constitution the nation's protected areas are a common good  of the Bolivian people. 'We believe that seismic exploration is not justified, even  more so now that President Morales has given his support to  Ecuador's Yasuní Initiative' to leave oil in that biodiverse  Amazonian region untouched, Flores said. PRODENA is promoting no-petroleum initiative for the Madidi,  following the lines of Ecuador's historic decision in August  to leave untouched the approximately 20 percent of the  country's petroleum reserves located in the Yasuní Park --  in exchange for compensation from the international  community through a special trusteeship. But Flores pointed out that the big difference between  Yasuní and Madidi is that the Bolivian park's oil reserves  have not been quantified -- and vast deposits are unlikely  to be found there. 'As a result, the monetary value of the Madidi fields cannot  be calculated,' states the campaign's argument against  petroleum development. But PRODENA also underscores that while preventing oil  drilling is important not only for preventing greenhouse gas  emissions, but also for the wide range of environmental  services that an intact park can provide. Climate expert Capriles, meanwhile, pointed out that  megaprojects in Madidi lack widespread support because they  are geared towards for-export petroleum development, without  a component that would improve the living conditions of the  area's indigenous communities. Once again, the indigenous peoples 'will be forgotten,' she  said.  Madidi is home to 46 indigenous communities from six  different tribes.  Those residents have not yet been  consulted about the projects planned for the park. Fernández, of the Save the Madidi Campaign, believes efforts  to exploit non-renewable resources in protected areas  indicate 'reprehensible incoherence' with President  Morales's discourse about protecting the environment and his  repeated invocations to 'Pachamama' (Mother Earth), a deity  of the Andean indigenous peoples. In fact, political analysts and environmentalists alike say  they see internal tensions between those in the government  who promote economic development and those who promote  environmental protection in areas of high biodiversity --  but such tensions have not been overt. For instance, SERNAP official Coello said that the  hydroelectric dam plan dates back years, but his office has  not received a request for the environmental impact study  needed to move forward. Fernández suggested that effective alternatives are needed  to fight poverty in the area, without adding environmental  problems, and instead making appropriate use of  international cooperation 'so that the official discourse in  favour of Mother Earth is translated into government  policies for sustainable development. '  