Every night at 1:00 AM, Julio César Amaya gets up to turn on  the faucet, because it is the only time that there is piped  water in his neighbourhood - the poor district of San José, in  the city of Soyapango, one hour east of the capital of El  Salvador. The water runs for only one hour.  But sometimes he gets out  of bed in vain for several nights in a row, because the  water doesn’t come. 'When the water runs, we try to fill a big tank, so the  water will last in case it doesn’t come back for three  days,' Amaya, 69, told IPS. According to projections by the Economic Commission for  Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC) study 'The Economics  of Climate Change in Central America: Summary 2010' released  in late November, this country of 6. 1 million people will be  hit hardest by water shortages in the region. The United Nations agency reported that population growth in  the region could drive up demand for water by nearly 300  percent by 2050 and by more than 1,600 percent by 2100,  without factoring in the impact of climate change or  improvements in efficiency in water use. But 'With climate change, demand may expand 20 percent more  than in this baseline scenario,' and total availability of  renewable water could fall 63 percent by 2100, from current  levels. According to these projections, El Salvador would be  affected the most, followed by Honduras and Nicaragua. In addition, ECLAC forecasts that the cumulative cost of the  impact of climate change in Central America by 2100, in a  scenario of continued intensive use of fossil fuels, could  amount to 73 billion dollars, equivalent to 54 percent of  the region’s GDP for 2008. That estimate is based on the impact on agriculture, water  resources and biodiversity, and on the increased intensity  of hurricanes, storms and floods. 'Although it is estimated that Central America will continue  to generate only a minimal part of the planet’s GHG  (greenhouse gas emissions), it is already one of the regions  most vulnerable to the consequences of these emissions,' the  report says. Environmentalists in El Salvador were not surprised by  ECLAC’s projections. 'It’s not by chance that in Central America, El Salvador is  the most water-stressed country,' Nelson Cuéllar, a  researcher at the Research Programme on Development and the  Environment (PRISMA), told IPS. El Salvador is one of the most deforested countries in Latin  America, and its high population density of 300 inhabitants  per square kilometre, and the fact that 63 percent of the  population lives in cities, lead to high demand for water,  which is not available to everyone, Cuellar said. Official figures from 2008 show that only 55 percent of  rural-dwellers have piped water, compared to 90 percent of  the urban population. In the countryside, families not connected to the water grid  depend on non-potable water from wells and rivers, which are  also drying up due to the high demand. El Salvador is the third most unequal country in the region  in terms of access to water, according to the Human  Development Report for Latin America and the Caribbean,  'Acting On The Future: Breaking The Intergenerational Cycle  Of Inequality', published in July by the United Nations  Development Programme (UNDP). The UNDP study reports that 88 percent of the richest  households in this country have access to water, compared to  44 percent of the poorest families. Ángel Ibarra of the Salvadoran Ecological Unit (UNES), a  local NGO, said man-made environmental damages have affected  the water cycle, and today much of the surface water does  not seep into the ground, replenishing aquifers, but instead  flows uncontrolled, causing floods. Meanwhile, many rivers dry up in the summertime, causing  water supply problems for rural families. All of these factors, he said, are linked to the country’s  social and environmental vulnerability, generated by  development models that have put business profits over the  environment and people. He was referring to the neoliberal policies followed during  the 20 years that the right-wing Nationalist Republican  Alliance (ARENA) governed the country, until President  Mauricio Funes of the leftist Farabundo Marti National  Liberation Front (FMLN) took office in June 2009. 'For years, real estate developers had no problem getting  permits to build in unsuitable areas, because of their  political connections,' Ibarra told IPS. Unequal access to water is also aggravated by certain  unethical or corrupt practices by wealthy sectors of the  population. ANDA, the government water and sanitation company,  discovered in October that some 3,000 homes and businesses  in the most exclusive parts of San Salvador had no water  meters to measure usage, but instead paid a fixed monthly  quota of just 2. 29 dollars. 'It’s an absurd situation, where the rich pay a ridiculously  small fee for water,' said Ibarra, adding that poor families  without piped water pay up to two dollars for a barrel of  water every day -- in a country where 20 percent of the  population lives on less than two dollars a day, according  to the UNDP Human Development Report 2009. He also described as 'ludicrous' the cost of water for  companies that use large quantities in their production  processes, such as Coca Cola, which pay a mere 0. 06 cents of  a dollar per cubic meter. A bill presented by social organisations in 2007, with the  aim of boosting water quality and access for the population,  has been stalled in Congress due to lobbying by powerful  economic interests. 'Here there is water only where there is money; the rest of  us are out of luck,' said  Julio César Amaya, who gets by with the water he manages to  collect by crawling out of bed every night.  