A rough yardstick for identifying which Asian countries make  the biggest ripples in Cancún is the number of journalists who  crowd around the spokesperson immediately after a press  conference. Top Chinese negotiator Xie Zhenhua does attract a fair  crowd, but his popularity is constrained by the fact that he  requires an interpreter, which does not allow for repartee  or off-the-cuff remarks when there is a volley of questions  by journalists thrusting their microphones at him. Indian Environment Minister Jairam Ramesh has certainly come  into his own on this score.  As the spokesperson for the  BASIC group of countries, which includes Brazil, South  Africa and China, he is articulate, well-informed and witty.   Journalists swarm around him after a press conference, eager  to get him make a scathing remark about another country or  group of countries. This was very evident at a BASIC media meet where he listed,  among three 'non-negotiables', the need for fast-start  financing.  'It hasn't been fast, hasn't even started and  there is hardly any finance,' he quipped. Ramesh expressed deep concern about the U. S.  offer to reduce  carbon emissions by 17 percent from 2005 levels by 2020,  which worked out to a four percent reduction from the 1990  levels used as a baseline by Kyoto Protocol parties. He argued that without domestic legislation, executive  action could only achieve 14 percent reduction from 2020 on  2005 levels, which translates to zero percent reduction of  carbon emissions from 1990 levels. 'By any standards, the U. S.  offer on emission reduction for  2020 is deeply disappointing,' he said.  'It's one thing  being ambitious for 2050 when all of us will be dead but the  real issue is. . .  are you going to be held accountable for  2020? Mid-term targets are very essential. ' The U. S.  plans  to reduce its carbon emissions by 80 percent from 2005  levels by 2050. 'We would certainly expect the United States to better its  emission reduction commitments as well as its offer on fast- start finance,' Ramesh said, pointing out that the lag 'did  no justice to the world's pre-eminent economic power'. He articulated the criticism of the U. S that very many  delegates have been saying in the Cancún corridors but not  on an open platform.  The irony is that Ramesh had been seen,  in the build-up to the Copenhagen talks last December, as a  politician too close to the U. S.  He wrote a confidential letter to Prime Minister Manmohan  Singh, arguing that India voluntarily should accept cuts in  emissions, as the U. S.  has been asking China and India to  do.  Opposition political parties pounced on this leaked  letter and he had to disown it. With his present penchant for battling the U. S.  and any  other opponents of equitable agreements in Cancún, Ramesh  has reinvented himself as the representative not only of  South Asian negotiators but probably all of Asia.  In fact,  there is a sense of déjà vu, since India played this role to  the hilt at the Earth Summit in Rio de Janeiro in 1992. It is not only style that Ramesh has been amply  demonstrating in Cancún, but substance as well.  In November,  he wrote to Todd Stern, U. S.  President Barack Obama's  special envoy on climate change, to present a compromise on  the contentious issues of developing countries having to  monitor, report and verify (MRV) their climate control  actions in return for funding, along with international  consultation and analysis (ICA). He proposed that ICA should take place every two or three  years for countries whose emissions exceeded one percent of  the total.  The regime for developed countries would be far  more rigorous.  Every country would have to submit these to a  Subsidiary Body for Implementation (SBI).  There would be  full transparency on all these reports.  At Ramesh's press  conference specifically to explain India's role on climate  issues, copies of India's inventory of emissions were  distributed. In his press meet, Stern referred approvingly to Ramesh's  draft.  He thought that his proposal that developing  countries prepare a report which updates the data of their  national commissions and includes information on  inventories, mitigation actions, pledges and critical  assumptions on reducing emissions, and how these were  different from business as usual, would be welcome. However, he referred to how some of these were 'very  variable concepts'.  For instance, China and India had each  stated targets by which they would reduce the carbon  intensity of their economies, as a percentage of their GDPs,  but each country had its own method for calculating their  GDP, which presented problems. But Ramesh, always regarded as a maverick in the staid  Indian political class, may be playing a game of his own.  On  Wednesday, he did a volte face by declaring that India was  ready to accept binding emissions cuts, which changes a 27- year-old official position. This might explain his histrionics regarding the U. S. , while  actually capitulating to its pressure, along with that of  other small island states and fellow South Asian countries,  which are in a hurry to receive fast-start financing. He claimed he was being flexible and wanted to be proactive  in breaking the impasse in Cancún.  Whether this tactic will  work, or will rebound on India, the next few days will tell. 