Latin America should create regional conventions to protect  biodiversity and combat the impacts of climate change,  according to Ecuadorian environmentalist Yolanda Kakabadse,  president of the World Wild Fund for Nature International  (WWF). Climate agreements should be centred on eliminating  polluting emissions, and not just reducing them or  mitigating their effects, said Kakabadse, an activist who  served as environment minister in Ecuador from 1998 to 2000.  She sat down with TerraViva in the southeastern Mexican city  of Cancún, where she is attending the 16th Conference of the  Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on  Climate Change (COP16), which wraps up on Friday. Q: What needs to change in the COP meetings?  A: I think a different dynamic is needed.  In terms of their  content, the lack of stronger links between the conventions  on climate change and biodiversity is very damaging. The two issues should be considered together, because  ultimately climate change is due to poor ecosystem  management. I also think that the traditional way of grouping countries  together does not make much sense any more.  For instance,  people talk about Latin America, but there is no strong  foundation for the belief that its governments all have the  same agenda.  The United Nations should support all these  initiatives. Q: What can the region expect to get out of this summit, in  areas like finance and technology transfer?  A: The question is, what is it getting, and what can it get.   It should get more.  This continent is the richest in natural  resources, and that makes it a particularly attractive  region of the planet for a number of actions, like devising  a model of natural resource protection, and for creating new  dynamics for dealing with climate change, biodiversity  management, water, forests, and the concept of environmental  services. This natural capital has not been politically exploited,  especially in the case of South America, at these global  debates.  I think it will gain no more and no less than other  regions.  We have not developed a South American agenda very  successfully. Q: Is it feasible to design a climate agenda by country  blocs?  A: Yes, absolutely.  Among all the issues within the  conventions, some have real implications for the region,  while others are completely irrelevant to it. We should create regional agreements that are based on the  same framework, but that take into account relevant matters,  because we waste an enormous amount of time trying to  respond to each and every challenge in the treaties. We should concentrate on issues concerned with forests,  water, the problems of adapting to climate change, and  shared management of ecosystems and fisheries.  If we do not  do this, we will not be able to contribute key ideas to the  convention. We face a very serious problem in that our South American  countries do not receive sufficient funding. Q: Should some countries, like Mexico, Brazil and Argentina,  adopt compulsory emissions reduction targets?  A: Every country should have goals for the rational use of  resources, and implement social inclusion policies.  As of  now, the approval process for every new installation should  take development ethics into account, because this is not  only about money but about responsibility towards our own  populations. It is not a matter of the countries of the South providing  climate benefits for those of the North: we will all sink or  swim together.  Every country has a social obligation to set  emission reduction targets. Q: What should the foundation of development ethics be?  A: One of the key issues is rational use of natural  resources, which requires the development of policies for  conservation, respect for our ecosystems -- not just as the  source of life, but also for their contribution to economic  opportunities -- social welfare and alternative job  creation. This perspective is absent in our countries.  We simply  exploit resources without caring about what will happen in  the next 10 years. Q: How can opposition to the idea of putting a price on  ecosystems be overcome?  A: There is a tendency to confuse value and price.  When we  really appreciate the true value of natural resources, we  can take policy decisions, and when we have designed  strategies to protect those ecosystems, we will be able to  think about an efficient pricing system. I also see the debate about pricing as a fallacy, because it  arises from an anti-market ideology.  In my country we market  bananas, oil and shrimp.  Why should we be reluctant to put a  price on a service that guarantees our livelihood?Q: Ecuador has established the Yasuni Initiative, which  seeks to raise international funds in exchange for  refraining from extracting oil from the Yasuni biosphere  reserve.  Could this approach be replicated in oil-producing  countries like Mexico?   A: The initiative is based on the argument that oil should  be left underground in places where the value of the flora  and fauna is higher.  There is a cost involved in leaving  fossil fuels underground, and it should be paid for.  This  requires that the convention recognise the value of non- emissions. The price of avoiding emissions is the profit that would be  made by extracting the oil, and if a country is willing to  forgo this, it should be rewarded for these non-emissions.   It is entirely valid to create a new protocol, based on the  concept of non-emissions. * This story appears in the IPS TerraViva online published  for the U. N.  Conference on Climate Change in Cancún. 