An entire body of leaders, spearheaded by U. N.  Secretary- General Ban Ki-moon, is now looking at REDD+ as a panacea to  global warming with multiple benefits thrown in. 'REDD+ is the 'shortest shortcut' to address climate change;  we will do all we can to support it, ' Ban told a packed  audience of dignitaries, heads of state, indigenous  community leaders, NGOs, forestry organisations and citizens  convened by influential US NGO, Avoided Deforestation  Partners. Org, on the sidelines of high-level deliberations  at Cancún.  REDD+ stands for Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and  Forest Degradation.  It essentially supports developing  countries financially and technically to either prevent  deforestation or regenerate forests, and is currently not a  part of either the Kyoto Protocol or the U. N.  Framework  Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC).  It is, however, being both pushed and deliberated on at the  meetings underway currently in Cancún. 'The overall message of REDD+ is that it is progressing  well,' said Norway's Prime Minister Jens Stoltenberg.  'The  personal leadership of heads of state of national  governments like Guyana, Brazil and Indonesia has helped.  So  the main effort is by national governments. 'REDD+ has garnered around $4. 5 billion in funds so far  through bilateral agreements.  Most of the funding currently  is from Norway, which is funding both reforestation and  avoided deforestation programmes in Guyana and Indonesia.  In May 2010, Norway signed a $1 billion deal with Indonesia,  which Dr.  Kuntoro Mangkusubroto, the head of Indonesia's  government REDD+ Unit, said was a partnership that is the  best way to approach the climate change problem and which he  hoped would become a worldwide model. Kuntoro, however, added that the process of REDD+ needed  careful consideration in its implementation.  'From an economy that was based on cutting trees, we are now  introducing a new way of managing things without cutting.  It  needs a whole new paradigm of government change,' said  Kuntoro.  Kuntoro's leadership in the reconstruction of Aceh after the  devastating tsunami of December 2005, with 93 percent of  funds actually seeing direct results on the ground, has been  lauded by the international community.  Norway's PM Stoltenberg also highlighted the political risk  involved in staking money on REDD+.  'It's hard to win elections by raising taxes,' quipped  Stoltenberg, 'which is why we too are dependent on the  success of Indonesia's efforts.  The concept is simple: we  pay per tonne of carbon reduced, measured after a year. ''Besides,' he continued, 'as a political investor,  transformation is essential. 'Billionaire-philanthropist George Soros, founder of the Open  Society Foundation which has given over $50 million so far  to REDD+ efforts, says 'REDD+ is a method that can be done,  and can be done cheaper than any other method. ' International forestry organisations and prominent  individuals like Kenyan Nobel Peace Prize winner Professor  Wangari Maathai and U. N . Messenger of Peace Dr.  Jane Goodall  are in strong favour of promoting REDD+.  In a video message to the group at Cancún, Maathai said she  saw REDD+ as an excellent livelihood option, apart from its  conservation and climate change benefits, while Goodall said  conserving and re-generating forests would help save the  world's rich biodiversity.  But in spite of the high-profile support for REDD+, one of  its first executors, Guyanan President Bharrat Jagdeo,  highlighted in blunt terms the difficulties in getting the  international financial institutions 'up to speed' on the  matter.  'What I have a problem with is I have x tonnes of carbon  saved, Norway is paying, but I can't get the money,' said  Jagdeo.  The World Bank, in this instance, has mired the  Norwegian aid in bureaucracy so deep that Jagdeo feels  political will be lost in using this new tool.  'Developing countries run the risk of the same situation as  before: if there is no corresponding flow of finance,  political capital will be lost,' he said. Developing nations have been complaining throughout the  talks at Cancún that climate financing, either promised or  in general, is unforthcoming.  None of the $30 billion promised till 2012 by industrialised  nations at Copenhagen last December for adaptation and  mitigation in poorer countries has been remitted so far.  A  further $100 billion was promised for the same along with  technology transfer by 2020.  With official funding through the U. N.  framework remaining a  serious problem anyway, REDD+'s propagation seems to hold  out promise through the market, as in the case of the U. S.   state of California.  Unlike its national government, California has a law to  reduce emissions by 2020 to 1990 levels, with a slew of  features like 'cap and trade', energy efficiency, clean cars  and low-carbon operations.  It now uses this to implement its  REDD+ market strategy, while it waits to pass its draft  REDD+ law.  The vice president of the Pacific Gas & Electric  Corporation, Steve Kline, says the system works only because  it is both climate-effective and cost-effective.  'So we have renewables, low-carbon operations and together  we have offsets with local California companies.  But we had  to convince our customers first,' explained Kline.  Significant progress has been made so far at the Cancún  talks to formulate a REDD+ strategy with components for  local community rights, and gender considerations. But while the drafts on REDD+ are almost ready at the Cancún  deliberations, organisations like CARE International urge  caution in finalising all REDD+ drafts. 'The critical issue in a REDD mechanism is to have strong  safeguards to prevent it from harming the livelihoods and  violating the rights of indigenous peoples and local  communities,' says Raja Jarrah, CARE's REDD Advisor. 'The real test will be how the words unfold into  implementation on the ground,' says Jarrah.  