'We are the coldest country in the world. . .  so global warming is good for us.  The  warmer it is, the bigger the harvests. . .  They talk about stopping deforestation of  the tropical jungles to fight climate change, but we don't have tropical jungles. 'The frankness of Russian lawmaker Viktor Shudegov revealed an  'inconvenient' truth, the ongoing lack of awareness about global warming, in  a parallel meeting to the climate change summit hosted by Mexico in the  resort city of Cancún, Nov.  29 to Dec.  10. Shudegov synthesised how difficult it is for public opinion in a country like  Russia to take up the challenge of climate change, despite being the most  serious global problem -- according to scientists -- that humanity will face  this century. This dynamic, in which urgent domestic problems take the fore -- like the  economic crisis afflicting nearly the entire industrialised world -- means that  attempts to adopt a binding global pact to reduce climate-changing gas  emissions repeatedly crumble.  And the Cancún summit, officially known as the 16th Conference of Parties  (COP 16) to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change,  was no exception. A driving force of the UN-led negotiations for years has been the effort to  attract the private sector, offering more and more opportunities for business  in the still nascent 'green economy. 'The inclusion of carbon capture and storage (CCS) systems among the  financeable mechanisms for reducing the emissions of greenhouse gases is  one example of that trend. It means extracting carbon dioxide, one of the leading greenhouse gases, and  sequestering it in 'sinks,' deep in the oceans, in forests and underground.   Those investing in such deals would then be able to trade emissions credits  on the carbon market. But many environmentalists and scientists believe that the carbon market is  getting ahead of itself. 'Carbon capture and storage technology has not been proved yet.  It is not  ready to be put into practice.  It is a further way of moving away from  renewable energies, moving away from mitigation, to some kind of technology  that would not solve the problem,' Nigerian Nnimmo Bassey, chair of Friends  of the Earth International (FOEI), told Tierramérica. 'What is coping with global warming? Reducing the carbon launched into the  atmosphere.  So why don't we leave the carbon where it belongs. . .  in the  ground?' said Bassey, one of the 2010 winners of the Right Livelihood Award,  known widely as the Green Nobel. Greenhouse gases are released by the combustion of petroleum, natural gas  and carbon, and in deforestation, agriculture, land-use changes and  industrial production.  The biggest emitters, led by China and the United States, cannot reach an  agreement on goals for reducing emissions that would keep the global  average temperature increase under two degrees Celsius. If we cross that threshold, say climate scientists, global warming will reach a  tipping point that would unleash catastrophic changes. Adopting a green or low-carbon economy means dramatically modifying the  way that most of humanity conceives of economic activity.  At first glance, it is easier to begin by halting deforestation of the world's  forests and jungles, responsible for 18 percent of global greenhouse  emissions.  The REDD+ initiative (Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and Forest  Degradation), which attracted a lot of attention at COP 16, calls for rich  countries to finance forest-saving actions in developing countries, benefitting  local actors, and rural and indigenous communities in particular. REDD+ 'is attracting both rich countries and countries with forests' to some  form of 'carbon exchange,' because, said Bassey, 'rich countries can keep  polluting, and countries with forests believe they can get some money  through the REDD mechanism. ' It is not true conservation, but rather a way of reducing emissions, according  to the Nigerian expert.  When a forest is included in the mechanism, it will  prevent the local communities from utilising it as they have for their  livelihood, 'because whoever is in the forest will have to assure that the  carbon stock would be retained. 'The key lies in establishing a system of clear controls, says attorney Adrianna  Quintero, of the Natural Resources Defence Council (NRDC), a U. S. -based  environmental group. To achieve the goal of conservation, 'monitoring and transparency are critical,  as it is for ensuring respect for the rights of indigenous and rural peoples,'  Quintero told Tierramérica. Despite all the problems, the UN system of negotiations remains the only one  possible.  'The diplomatic process is a little slow,' but how else can the  interests and positions of the 192 countries party to the Convention on  Climate Change be taken into account, she said. In Quintero's view, the different stances have been drawing closer towards  common ground that can serve as the basis for a broader treaty.  And much of  that progress is the result of the way that host Mexico led the negotiations --  not only in Cancún, but over the course of the year. One pillar on this common ground is to provide funds to poor countries for  confronting their new climate and weather realities, adopting new  technologies and paying for the enormous losses resulting from more  frequent and intense weather disasters. But once again, there are clashing interests.  At COP 15, held last year in  Copenhagen, the pledge was to deliver at least 30 billion dollars a year, 'and  not even the 30 billion is coming,' said Bassey. According to the FOEI leader, the rich countries have done all they can to  move money set aside for aid to use instead as loans, 'to make profits out of  the misery of the poor countries hit by global warming. 'This does not mean not just looking for funds, it means 'rich countries paying  their climate debt,' said Bassey.  'European countries for years have been  colonising the atmosphere with their carbon emissions,' he added. There is an enormous gap between the climate justice Bassey is seeking and  the route of 'the possible' pursued in the official negotiations. And there is little hope of addressing the central question -- how to halt  climate-changing emissions -- until the next summit, COP 17, in Durban,  South Africa. 'The biggest and most powerful nations on earth simply aren't paying  attention to physics and chemistry,' said Bill McKibben, founder of global  climate campaign 350. org in a statement. Civil society is 'not big enough yet to beat the fossil fuel industry and its  allies, but we're gaining,' said McKibben. 'What is the point of all theses meetings during two weeks,' wondered Bassey.   'We are heading nowhere.  And it shows the lack of recognition of the  seriousness of the warming crisis. ''When the impacts really multiply, when the climate hits a tipping point, not  even the rich countries will escape the disaster that will follow,' she warned. (*This story was originally published by Latin American newspapers that are  part of the Tierramérica network.  Tierramérica is a specialised news service  produced by IPS with the backing of the United Nations Development  Programme, United Nations Environment Programme and the World Bank. ) 