The mountainous areas of South America's Andean nations supply water to the  coastal cities, provide habitat to important biodiversity, and serve as natural  barriers, but global warming threatens those regions, which are home to millions  of people. 'It is clear that the glaciers are receding, and some communities can see that  the climate is changing.  Precipitation is more unstable, and in the cities along  the coast face water supply problems,' Peru's Environment Minister Antonio  Brack told Tierramérica. In Peru, Ecuador, Bolivia and Chile, the glaciers are a principal source of  freshwater, and as they shrink, it means less water is available for the cities in  the valleys and on the coast. Peru's total area of mountain ice fields has decreased 22 percent in the last 35  years, with a 12-percent reduction in the volume of water, according to that  country's National Environmental Council. To confront the threats hanging over the Andes, the region's nations have  formed a consortium for sustainable development, CONDESAN, a member of  the Mountain Partnership, created in 2002. To date, 50 countries, 16 intergovernmental organisations and 107 civil  society groups make up the Partnership, which has the support of the United  Nations Food and Agriculture Organisation (FAO). 'We are implementing programmes to prevent fires in the highlands, to  preserve wetlands, and to improve freshwater systems management,' Marco  Chiu, Ecuador's deputy minister for climate change, told Tierramérica. The protection of mountainous areas was a key issue at the 16th Conference  of Parties (COP 16) to the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change,  which took place Nov.  28 to Dec.  10 in the Mexican resort city of Cancún.  In the arid regions of Central Asia, Chile, Argentina and Peru, where there is  little precipitation, the receding glaciers will have a much greater impact on  water availability than in Europe or other Asian regions.   That is one of the findings of the United Nations Environment Programme's  report, 'High Mountain Glaciers and Climate Change: Challenges to Human  Livelihoods and Adaptation,' presented in Cancún. Since 2008, Ecuador has been implementing water adaptation and usage  initiative, with 13 pilot plans in six provinces, backed by the Global  Environment Facility (GEF) and the UN Development Programme. Meanwhile, Peru is about to approve a plan for climate change adaptation and  mitigation, which is expected to have legal force in January and become part  of the national strategy approved in 2003. Since 2008, Colombia, Ecuador, Peru and Bolivia have been developing a  project to adapt to the impacts of receding glaciers in the tropical Andes  (PRAA), with the support of the World Bank. 'All of the regions have been affected.  The communities are lacking  information.  There should be a process of appropriation of the studies in  order to participate in the decision-making process,' indigenous Quechuan  activist Tarcila Rivera said in a Tierramérica interview.  She coordinates the  Continental Connection of Indigenous Women, and participated in COP 16,  along with Brack and Chiu. In 2002, the UN declared Dec.  11 'International Mountain Day,' and this year  it was dedicated to indigenous peoples and minorities living in mountainous  areas. 'There are weak points in the data, insufficient measurements, lack of  experience and insufficient methodological tools to calculate the region's  vulnerability.  The plan should be to guide us towards what we will do to fight  climate change,' said Peruvian Edwin Mansilla, coordinator of the climate  change unit for the Cuzco regional government. This region of about 72,000 square kilometres, home to 1. 1 million people,  holds a quarter of Peru's glaciers, of which 30 percent has disappeared,  according to the regional government. The communities are concerned about the water situation and the state of the  highland wetlands, which provide food for alpaca herds.  These camelid  cousins of the llama are a source of revenue for the local communities, which  sell the alpaca wool to be made into textiles and clothing. 'The traditional knowledge of indigenous peoples must be recognised and  applied, because the people have long survived by using that knowledge,'  said Rivera. (*This story was originally published by Latin American newspapers that are  part of the Tierramérica network.  Tierramérica is a specialised news service  produced by IPS with the backing of the United Nations Development  Programme, United Nations Environment Programme and the World Bank. ) 