A plan to establish waste-to-energy plants in New Delhi as part of a carbon- trading programme has run into fierce opposition over hazards posed toxic  chemical byproducts. 'The government is mistaken if it believes that the citizens of Delhi are  unaware of environmental issues,' Gopal Krishna, convenor of the Toxics  Alliance Watch tells IPS.  'These are not illiterate villagers in some distant  district and they worry about being directly affected by three pilot waste-to- energy plants fast coming up in their city. 'Krishna told IPS that he is encouraged by the stiff resistance from the affluent  south Delhi locality Sukhdev Vihar.  The area is populated by doctors,  engineers, writers, and artists.  They have already fought off a biomedical  waste incinerator that spewed plumes of toxic smoke over a boundary wall.  'We will certainly oppose this new waste-to-energy plant, as it poses an even  greater threat to health than the biomedical incinerator,' Vanya Joshi, a  Sukhdev Vihar resident who makes films on environmental issues told IPS. 'How can they ask us to put up with this so-called waste-to-energy project?'  says Siddharth, one of India’s most respected painters, who lives and works  out of Sukhdev Vihar.  In addition to the Delhi plant, two other plants are being built at Timarpur and  Ghazipur, on the northern and eastern outskirts of the city.  Together, the  three plants will process 3,200 tonnes of solid municipal waste to produce 26  megawatts of electricity, beginning 2011. The Delhi state government includes waste-to-energy plants in its climate  change initiatives for the 2009-2012 period, claiming that its agenda is in  line with the Prime Minister’s National Action Plan on Climate Change  (NAPCC) launched in June 2008.    'This is a false claim,' Krishna told IPS.  'The NAPCC document categorically  refers to bio-methanation, a biological treatment method rather than  technology to produce refuse-derived fuel (RDF) which relies on incineration. ' The United States Environmental Protection Agency says that all municipal  waste combustors, regardless of technology, release toxic pollutants such as  cadmium, lead, mercury, dioxin, furans, sulphur dioxide, and particulate  matter.  Of these persistent organic pollutants (POPs), dioxins and mercury are  considered particularly harmful because they remain in the environment and  in animals.  On Jun.  27, the residents of Sukhdev Vihar formally petitioned Delhi’s chief  minister, Sheila Dikshit, demanding to know how 'the government can allow  such a hazardous project to come up amidst residential colonies. '  The  residents also petitioned the Delhi High Court for relief.  Within a radius of two kilometres from the existing and upcoming  incinerators are three major hospitals: Holy Family Hospital, Fortis-Escorts  Heart Institute, and Indraprastha Apollo hospital.   Also in close proximity is  the Jamia Millia Islamia University.  Krishna finds it galling that the waste-to-energy plants are registered as part  of a carbon credit programme and claim to be Clean Development  Mechanisms (CDMs) by generating electricity using a non-conventional  energy source.  CDMs are arrangements under the Kyoto Protocol that allow industrialised  countries with a greenhouse gas (GhG) reduction commitment to invest in  projects that reduce emissions in developing countries. 'This is preposterous,' he said.  'Waste incineration generates greenhouse  gases and clearly cannot qualify as a CDM. '  Krishna says that while communities living in the vicinity of incinerators are  most at risk, contamination can reach areas as far away as 1,000 miles (1,600  km).  POPs are known to have long-term toxic effects that can be passed from one  generation to the next through mother’s milk.  POPs threaten the health of  unborn children because they can pass through the placental wall and  interfere with foetal development. 'Every one of Delhi’s 12 million residents will be exposed to the toxins via the  food chain,' said Krishna.  