Anxious farmers gather in their field on a warm, clear day in Syria’s arid  northern region of Al-Raqqa, near the banks of the Euphrates River.  The ground  in this corner of the ‘fertile crescent’ is barren, save for a small herd of sheep on  the ten-hectare farm. Traditionally the winter rains start in late October.  If the dry spell stretches  through December, the staple wheat and lentil crops and their livelihood are a  write-off for another consecutive year. Swathes of Syria, Turkey, Iraq, Jordan, Lebanon, Israel and the Palestinian  territories have all been hit by a devastating drought this fall.  Although a ferocious storm hit the region this past weekend, with snow and  rain lashing Syria, farmers remember last year’s winter season, which started  well.  Then the rains stopped abruptly and extreme weather and diseases like  yellow rust set in and decimated the wheat. 'We pray for rain and a good income,' says 22 year-old Issa Sheikh, who  along with his brother struggles to cultivate their family’s land.  'Last year the  season was very bad.  The costs for fertilizer and seeds were high, and we had  no yield.  We now depend on work in the cities, and have taken loans from  friends and the bank. ' For Syria’s northeast governorates of Al-Raqqa, Deir Ezzour and Al-Hassakeh  - tucked between the borders of Turkey and Iraq and the centre of the  country’s petroleum industry - drought and uneven rainfall has stretched over  three consecutive years.  Syria’s leading strategic crops are wheat, barley, sugar beet and cotton.  A  large wheat exporter, the drought’s impact has now forced the agriculturally  self-reliant Syrian government to import the staple to meet local  consumption.  Many agricultural experts fault climate change as the primary driving factor.   'This year’s November was a very strange November,' says Mahmoud Solh,  head of the International Centre for Agricultural Research in the Dry Areas  (ICARDA), based near the northern city of Aleppo.  'There is a trend in  temperature, no doubt about it.  You feel there has been an up and down  fluctuation in rainfall and temperature, but nothing like what we are facing  now. ' After an assessment visit to Syria last September, Olivier De Schutter, the UN  Special Rapporteur on the Right to Food, estimated 1. 3 million people are  directly impacted by the serial drought - 95 percent of them in the northeast  - with 800,000 suffering severely.  'Most affected are small-scale farmers… and small-scale herders, who often lost 80-85 percent of their livestock since  2005,' states his initial report. 'These farmers already went through three years of drought and then to have  a fourth year, this is a disaster,' concurs Abdulla Tahir Bin Yehia, head of the  Food and Agriculture Organisation (FAO) in Damascus.  'Their capacity has  been depleted.  That’s why they need help.  A family is eight to ten people in  the northeast — that’s a huge number. 'Farmers like Al-Raqqa’s Sheikh brothers have been forced to leave their  families and find work further afield, in their case for subsistence wages in  construction during the summer in Lebanon, or as day labourers in factories  around Aleppo.  According to the UN’s Drought Response Plan published in 2010, by the start  of the year 65,000 families had migrated from their villages to Syria’s cities.   'This drastic move has not saved these internally displaced families from  further hardship and destitution,' the report says.  'Instead, they have lost  their social ties and are often exploited at below-market labour rates.  It has  also further increased the strain on the limited job market, resources and  public services, which were already affected by the presence of approximately  one million Iraqi refugees. 'Damascus is a major destination for the migrants, and relies heavily on the  Fijieh and Barrada springs to feed its burgeoning and ever-thirsty population.   Piped in from the nearby Anti-Lebanon mountain range, the over burdened  water supply is affected by decreasing snow melt, pipe leakage, water  evaporation, illicit wells and the rapid expansion of illegal housing. In an interview with IPS, Abdullah Droubi, director for water resources at the  Arab League’s Arab Centre for the Studies of Arid Zones and Dry Lands  (ACSAD) in Syria, points to other causation.  'The climate has not changed - we have this variation all the time.  We are  feeling the effects through population demand and water mismanagement,'  he says, estimating a 3 percent annual growth in Syria’s population, standing  roughly at 21 million today.  'Since 1986 we showed that population was a major driving force of this in  the Arab region, and this is what is happening now.  The government has to  make a population planning policy - we cannot stay like this.  We don’t have  enough resources. 'The Ministry of Agriculture and Agrarian Reform and Ministry of Irrigation are  working with international water and agriculture specialists on a variety of  alternative and sustainable water solutions.  But government and donor aid for  this impoverished population is hamstrung by a scarcity of funds. 'We believe the complex challenges in the dry areas will require an integrated  approach,' says ICARDA’s Solh.  He speaks of three major factors: natural  resource management including water productivity and efficiency; crop  improvement including drought and heat tolerant crops, and resistant to  biotic stresses; and socio-economic aspects and institutional support. Mahmoud el-Ahmad, a farmer in his late thirties, supports a family of nine  children in northern Al-Bab.  Living off an eight-hectare plot of barley and  lentils; he supplements his income ploughing a rich neighbour’s farm.  This  year he planted seeds with a borrowed ‘zero-tillage’ tractor introduced by  ICARDA.  The tractor doesn’t churn the earth when planting seeds, thus  preserving the earth’s moisture.  El-Ahmad made 4,000 dollars last year for  his entire crop, and hopes he can save an additional 20 dollars per hectare  with the new tilling method.  But most of his friends are working in factories or in Lebanon, he says.  'The  land cannot feed the families, everyone has to go look for another job. '  