Development in Africa could falter as climate change grips the  continent, increasing the length and severity of droughts and  floods by altering precipitation patterns, among other  impacts. The region needs a major shift in its economic development  policies and thinking towards decentralised, green economic  development, experts now say.  'The world's big economies are largely living off financial  transactions which are unconnected to development,' warns  Supachai Panitchpakdi, secretary-general of United Nations  Conference on Trade and Development.  'Export growth does not automatically result in green  economic growth, we must look at trade for development,'  said Panitchpakdi. In a rejection of failed neoliberal economic policies,  Panitchpakdi said strong national policies on investments,  taxation, protection of local industries, including  subsidies, and changes to less restrictive intellectual  property regimes are what is needed to green economies in  Africa and elsewhere.  'Green economic development underpins environmental  protection, economic growth and development,' he said. The tentative global economic recovery this year is largely  a jobless recovery because the current economic growth model  is designed to make 'people redundant', said Achim Steiner,  executive director of the U. N.  Environment Programme (UNEP). 'It favours large concentrated power grids, for example,  which require very few people,' Steiner told IPS.  A low-carbon economy is not for the rich countries, it is  for the poorest because it is more resource-efficient,  employs more people and brings development at a lower cost,  he said, adding, 'We have to grow the economies of Africa  but only through green sustainable development, delinked  from increasing resource use. ' 'After 50 years of development, 80 percent of Kenya's  population had no access to electricity.  Now, after a 2008  shift to renewable energy, more Kenyans have access to  electricity than ever before,' he noted.  Kenya's feed-in tariff, similar to Germany's, is expected to  produce about 1300 MW of electricity generation capacity  from biomass, geothermal, biogas, solar energy, wind, and  small hydro this year.  A feed-in tariff offers long-term  contracts at a set price based on the cost for renewable  energy generation.  Germany now employs more than 380,000 people in its  renewable energy sector and 1. 8 million in its environmental  sector - far more than its vaunted automobile sector,  Steiner said.  'More than half a billion people in rural Africa have little  or no access to electricity,' noted Nebojsa Nakicenovic of  the International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis in  Austria. 'They pay a large part of their incomes for some kerosene  lighting or diesel electric at a cost that is twice that of  what the average European pays,' Nakicenovic, a leading  energy economist, told IPS.  'Or worst of all they are forced  to rely on flashlights, which is the most expensive form of  lighting available. 'Universal access to modern energy services globally has been  estimated to cost between $80 and $100 billion a year in a  number of recent studies, including those by the  International Energy Agency and the United Nations  Industrial Development Organisation in Vienna.  'That seems like a lot of money but it is significantly less  than the $300 to $600 billion being spent annually to  subsidise the fossil fuel sector,' Nakicenovic pointed out. Technically, it is doable, representing roughly 20 gigawatts  of energy generation - less than what countries like Brazil  and South Africa have been able to add in recent years. Increasing energy access in Africa has a huge range of  benefits, he says.  It would drive economic development,  improve the health of millions by reducing indoor air  pollution from kerosene and biomass burning, reduce  emissions of greenhouse gases like black carbon and reduce  deforestation.   Local technology and local energy distribution in the form  of small-scale hydro, biomass, biogas, solar, wind and other  forms of production are best suited to Africa.  The challenge  is mobilising the investments needed, he said.  These should  be national programmes with long-term financial commitments  from the international community.   'We don't need international climate treaties to do this,'  said Nakicenovic.  'Doing things right will bring green  growth and prosperity. '*This IPS story is part of a series supported by the Climate  and Development Knowledge Network - http://www. cdkn. org. 