Poor defendants on death row, immigrants in unfair deportation  proceedings, torture victims, domestic violence survivors and  victims of racial discrimination - all these groups are  consistently being denied access to justice while those  responsible for the abuses are protected, according to a new  report by the American Civil Liberties Union. Jamil Dakwar, director of the ACLU Human Rights Programme,  told IPS, 'Access to justice is a fundamental human right  and bedrock tenet of American democratic system - it was  even codified by the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,  which the U. S.  championed 62 years ago. ''Unfortunately, access to the courts and effective remedy  have been severely curtailed over the last decade,  especially for those who need it most,' he said.  'It is time  for our government and judiciary to recommit to respecting  and promoting this essential right. 'According to the report, 'Slamming the Courthouse Doors',  the 'actions of the executive, federal legislative, and  judicial branches of the United States government have  seriously restricted access to justice for victims of civil  liberties and human rights violations, and have limited the  availability of effective (or, in some cases, any) remedies  for these violations. 'For example, the report details how individuals convicted of  capital crimes who seek to present newly found evidence of  their innocence or claims of serious constitutional  violations are being denied recourse in the courts. Federal legislation, most prominently the Antiterrorism and  Effective Death Penalty Act of 1996 (AEDPA), and Supreme  Court decisions, has greatly limited access to federal  review of state court death penalty convictions, the report  says.   It also charges that victims of rape, assault, religious  rights violations and other serious abuses in prison are  having their claims thrown out of court because of a  restrictive federal law.  Immigrants who may have legitimate claims to remain in the  U. S.  are unknowingly waiving their opportunity to pursue  these claims and are being swiftly deported because of  unfair procedures, the report charges. It also notes that victims of domestic violence are being  denied the opportunity to seek civil remedy under the  Violence Against Women Act because of recent court  decisions. Similarly, victims of torture and 'extraordinary rendition'  have been denied their day in court. The administration of President Barack Obama has sought to  extinguish lawsuits brought by torture survivors through use  of 'judicially-created doctrines such as the so-called  'state secrets' privilege and qualified immunity to dismiss  civil suits alleging torture, cruel, inhuman, or degrading  treatment, forced disappearance, and arbitrary detention,  without consideration on the merits,' the report says.  It charges that by invoking the 'state secrets' privilege,  the Obama administration can not only restrict discovery but  can quash an entire lawsuit - without demonstrating the  validity of their claim to a judge.   Immigrants also are systematically denied access to justice,  as they face monumental obstacles to obtaining review of  removal orders.  The U. S.  government has claimed that there is no right to  judicial review of diplomatic assurances when it has sought  to transfer individuals to countries known to employ  torture. Federal immigration officials also have used a procedure  known as stipulated removal to deport non-U. S.  citizens  without a hearing before an immigration judge.    'There is a lack of meaningful safeguards to ensure people  with mental disabilities facing possible deportation from  the United States are afforded fair hearings.  As a result,  legal permanent residents and asylum seekers with a lawful  basis for remaining in the United States may have been  unfairly deported from the country because their mental  disabilities made it impossible for them to effectively  present their claims in court,' the report says.    The ACLU's recommends that Congress amend the habeas-related  provisions of AEDPA so that federal courts are more  accessible to prisoners asserting claims of constitutional  violations.    It also urges the creation of and adequate funding for state  defender organisations that are independent of the judiciary  and that have sufficient resources to provide quality  representation to indigent capital defendants. Congress should pass legislation that creates procedures to  prevent the abuse of the state secrets privilege, and the  Obama administration should prohibit the reliance on  'diplomatic assurances' to deport or otherwise transfer  persons from the United States.  The ACLU also urged Congress to enact the End Racial  Profiling Act, which would ban racial profiling and provide  for government monitoring and documentation of racial  profiling. Frances Boyle, a legal expert familiar with the report, told  IPS, 'Because of the deliberate U. S.  federal court-packing  scheme undertaken by the [Ronald] Reagan, [George] Bush Sr.   and [George] Bush Jr.  administrations, today about 60  percent of U. S.  federal judges at all levels - up to and  including the U. S.  Supreme Court - have been members of the  Federalist Society, and/or were vetted by the Federalist  Society. 'Boyle, a law professor at the University of Illinois,  described this organisation as 'right wing, racist, bigoted,  reactionary, elitist, sexist, warmongering and  totalitarian'. For example, he said, almost all of the lawyers involved in  the Bush Jr.  administration's torture scandal were and still  are members of the Federalist Society. 