The traditional image of rural women in Latin America is  shifting, from one of subsistence farmers raising their  families to that of women playing a growing role in small- and  large-scale commercial and productive activities.  But behind  that change lie both success stories and exploitation. Gladis Vila, a Quechua farmer from a village in mountainous  Huancavelica, Peru’s poorest region, is one of the women  behind a movement that has driven the emergence of  ecological farmers markets in 22 of the country’s 25  regions, which offer tangible proof that it is possible to  produce food without destroying the environment. 'Indigenous women farmers are preservers of biodiversity; we  do business respecting nature,' Vila, who is the head of the  National Organisation of Indigenous Andean and Amazonian  Women of Peru (ONAMIAAP), told IPS. Women produce between 60 and 80 percent of the food in most  developing countries, with the proportion rising in relation  to a country’s poverty level, according to the Food and  Agriculture Organisation (FAO). Rural activists, researchers and representatives of  development organisations from different Latin American  countries met early this month in Lima, in the seminar  'Mujer rural: cambios y persistencias', in which they  discussed the problems and needs of rural women in the broad  range of situations they face in the region. One of the participants, anthropologist Kirai de León,  shared the success story of a group of women who grow  aromatic and medicinal herbs in Uruguay. The Calmañana Cooperative, currently made up of 17 women  farmers, has been working for 25 years in the southern  province of Canelones.  The members of the cooperative not only supply local  supermarkets, but export their products to Europe and form  part of the national certification board for organic  products. 'They are highly respected' by people and businesses selling  herbs and spices, and 'have made quite a name for  themselves,' de León, who has supported the cooperative from  the start, told IPS. She explained that one of the medicinal herbs in greatest  international demand is 'marcela' (anchyrocline  satureioides), which has antioxidant, cell-protective, anti- inflammatory and antiviral properties. According to the World Health Organisation, 85 percent of  the world population uses herbal medicine for some aspect of  primary health care.  These Uruguayan women help meet these needs, while growing  their plants without the use of chemicals. 'We have to change the way we work: we have to not only take  care of our husbands, but also the environment.  That is an  important shift,' said Jeanine Anderson, an anthropologist  who specialises in gender issues at the Pontificia Catholic  University in Peru. Caring for the environment is linked to the question of  access to land.  Bolivian activist Elizabeth López of the  Latin American Network of Women Defenders of Social and  Environmental Rights stressed the importance of this, in  order for rural women to be economically independent. But 'The issue isn’t just access to land, but guaranteeing  that women have effective control over water use,  biodiversity, soil, and other natural resources,' the  Bolivian activist remarked to IPS.  'Without that, their  possibilities are limited. 'López said the expansion of other economic activities, like  mining, limit rural women’s right to land.  And although  women are the main producers of food, they own less than one  percent of land in the world, according to the United  Nations Development Programme (UNDP). In the Andes mountains, mining coexists uneasily alongside  farming and livestock raising, and has specific impacts on  women.  As the activity of mining corporations has grown in  rural areas, 'there has been a total lack of recognition of  the value of women’s work as livestock farmers,' said López,  citing protests led by women against mining companies in  Bolivia and other Andean countries. Another growing phenomenon is the increasing participation  of women as agricultural wage workers. In Peru, for example, large-scale agriculture has drawn  women from the Andes highlands to coastal areas.  One  illustration of this phenomenon is Gladys Campos, who used  to work for the Sociedad Agrícola Virú, an asparagus  producing agribusiness company that has benefited from the  country’s agro-export boom. Campos left Cochabamba, her hometown in the highlands of the  northwest region of La Libertad, to work for the company on  the coast.  But she was only employed there for two and a  half years: in October 2004 she was sacked after she set up  a union. 'We worked 17 hours a day for poverty wages,' Campos told  IPS.  'They didn’t pay us overtime.  They hire you and take  you there from your hometown, with promises that they’ll  help you, but then they make you work like a slave, and  deduct the cost of your food and board from your wages.  Then  they throw you out. ' Similar stories were described by other women at the  seminar. Campos is now secretary of the National Federation of  Peasant, Artisan, Native and Wage Working Women of Peru  (FEMUCARINAP). When she worked for the Sociedad Agrícola Virú, one of  Peru’s largest agro-exporters, she earned just 214 dollars a  month.  Women, she says, are not hired just as temporary  workers during the January to April main harvest season, but  work year-round, with no vacation time. Peru’s agro-exports grew 28 percent from January to  September this year, according to the Ministry of  Agriculture. Non-traditional products, such as fresh asparagus, carmine - - a food colouring extracted from the cochineal beetle  (Dactylopius coccus) -- grapes and mangos, represent 74  percent of the country’s agro-exports. 'Those who actually sustain the economy at the cost of long  hours of work are the workers, not the companies,' Campos  said. Anderson said it is important to study the impacts of  women’s growing participation in different small- and large- scale agricultural activities. In Colombia, women are displaced from their rural homes  indefinitely, by decades of armed conflict.  Colombian social worker Flor Edilma Osorio said one of these  displaced women told her that 'In the countryside, you have  hope. ' The remark, she said, reflects 'the longing for the  countryside felt by rural migrants caught up in urban  poverty. 'In the countryside you can be poor, but you have food.  In  the city, however, if you don’t have money, you can’t  survive.  The loss is total,' said the expert.  