As a dutiful new bride, Rubina Ikram moved into her in-laws’  home lugging a huge dowry that consisted not only of clothes,  furniture and linen, but also a wide array of electric  appliances — from a DVD player to a washing machine.    Three weeks after the wedding, however, the electric  goodies are still in their boxes in the Ikrams’ two-room  home in Karachi’s Lyari district.    'What’s the point?' asks Rubina’s mother-in-law, Kulsum  Begum.  'We never have electricity to run the machines!'   The Ikram home is among the 40 percent of Pakistani  households connected to the national electric grid.  But  Kulsum Begum says, 'We may well be living in the Dark Ages.   Half the time the power is playing truant.  On top of that,  come winter and the supply of gas starts to show an attitude  and refuses to flow steadily. '   It’s a situation that may help explain why Pakistan is  seriously considering coal to solve its energy problems,  even after the conclusion of a new climate change accord in  Mexico in December.  After all, of all the fossil fuels, coal  is the dirtiest, with its use spewing out a toxic stew that  includes carbon dioxide, sulfur dioxide, and even mercury.    Just last April, the World Bank refused to finance coal  exploration in Pakistan due to environmental concerns,  saying it would promote renewable energy initiatives  instead.    Mahfooz Bhatti, director of the Sindh government’s Thar  Coal and Power Project, however, asserts that cleaner ways  of extraction and power generation are possible 'through  coal gasification and use of supercritical technology' and  abiding by international environmental and social safeguard  standards'.    Kamran Kamal, senior business development advisor of  Engro Powergen Ltd, explains that supercritical power plant  technology uses less coal to produce more electricity.  'This  means lower carbon-dioxide emissions,' he says.  'It’s  affordable and economical and more importantly, meets World  Bank emission guidelines. '   'That’s correct,' adds Prof Khalid Rashid, a physicist  and environmentalist familiar with power generation  technologies.  'Supercritical plants and coal gasification  plants are not as environmentally damaging as the  conventional coal powered plants. '   'Supercritical power plants operate at a much higher  temperature and boiler pressures and burn coal more  efficiently,' he says.  Every kilogramme of coal provides  about 20 percent more electricity and in the process  produces 40 percent less carbon dioxide, he adds.    He explains that coal is oxidised to produce a mixture of  hydrogen and carbon monoxide, called syngas.  'The syngas is  then used to heat the boilers to produce steam that runs the  turbines to produce electricity with carbon dioxide reduced  to about 30 to 40 percent, depending on the design,' he  says.    According to Rashid, the global trend has been to build  plants using these technologies and give up conventional  coal-powered plants.  Research by International Energy Agency  (IEA) states that by replacing older power stations with  more efficient plants, greenhouse gas emissions can be  reduced by 5. 5 percent.    China, Germany, the United States, India, Greece, and  South Africa use this technology for their latest coal  plants, Kamal adds.    Engro Powergen, a subsidiary of one of Pakistan’s largest  conglomerates, Engro Corp, is working with the government of  the south-eastern province of Sindh to mine coal from Thar  Block II in the Tharparkar desert and then generate about  1,200 megawatts of electricity from a plant set up there.    Lignite coal deposits that could yield as much as 185  billion tonnes were discovered in Tharparkar desert as far  back as 1992 by the Geological Survey of Pakistan.     But Bhatti says that due to the 'availability of cheap  gas, non-availability of infrastructure, and institutional  challenges for large-scale coal sector operations', the  country’s coal reserves remained untouched for almost two  decades.  The Sindh Mines Department says that Pakistan’s  coal reserves have the potential to provide 200,000  megawatts of power — enough for the next 100 years, based on  today’s consumption rate.    Many have likened these to Saudi Arabia’s oil reserves of  264 billion barrels, which amount to a quarter of the global  total.  But some call the comparison erroneous since coal  cannot be traded like oil.    As it is, it will take up to six years before the Engro  power plant can start to generate electricity.  Still, Bhatti  insists that once it gets going, the power to be generated  by Engro from the Tharparkar deposits could meet Pakistan’s  energy needs for the next half-century.     It will also save the country about one billion dollars  every year, Engro says, based on its calculations.   'According to Pakistan Energy Year Book 2010, Pakistan  spends close to four billion dollars to import fuel for  power generation.  Given that our generation capacity is  about 14,000 megawatts and about 35 percent comes from RFO  (residual fuel oil), it translates to approximately 5,000  megawatts.  Our first project will be 1,200 megawatts, which  would be able to save about one billion dollars per year,'  says Kamal.    The government’s plans state that Pakistan’s energy pie  in 2010 would comprise 49 percent natural gas, 26 percent  oil, 13. 9 percent hydropower, 9 percent coal, 1. 1 percent  renewable, and 0. 9 percent nuclear.    By 2030 it projects Pakistan’s energy generation to  increase to 162,590 megawatts and to consist of 45 percent  natural gas, 19 percent coal, 18. 5 percent oil, 2. 5 percent  renewable, 10. 8 percent hydropower and 4. 2 percent nuclear.    The country now has a project that looks into underground  coal gasification and sequestering carbon dioxide while  generating 50 megawatts of electricity.  The Pakistan  Electric Power Co is undertaking a 1,200-megawatt coal  project.     Kamal sounds exasperated by the criticism of coal, saying  development cannot always be held hostage by environmental  concerns.  'If the rich countries of the world — also the  biggest polluters — are so concerned about carbon emissions,  perhaps they can set an example by closing down their coal- fired powerhouses and turn to clean energy,' says Kamal.    He says that coal remains the biggest source of energy in  the United States, China, Europe, and even India next door,  although they are trying to reduce reliance on it.   Pakistan’s tiny carbon footprint reaches less than one  percent of worldwide greenhouse gas emissions, he points  out.  