At first glance, Lake Constance, trapped between Germany, Switzerland, and  Austria, looks as peaceful as ever.  But under the lake's apparently placid waters,  a dramatic change is taking place - one that threatens to obliterate much of local  biodiversity. The temperature of the lake’s waters is rising at an alarming pace. According to records from the Agency for Environmental Protection of Baden  Wuerttemberg, the German federal state in which Lake Constance is situated,  the lake’s water temperatures have been rising by 0. 3 degrees Celsius per  decade over the past 50 years.  This rising of water temperatures is a global phenomenon caused by climate  change.  A recent study, carried out by the Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) at  the U. S.  National Aeronautics Administration, confirmed the causal link.  The JPL study, released in August, analyzed surface temperatures extracted  from nighttime thermal infrared imagery for 167 large lakes distributed  worldwide.  The data was collected from 1985 to 2009 for the months July  through September and January through March. The authors of the study, Philipp Schneider and Simon Hook, found that  nighttime surface water temperatures have been rapidly warming for the 24- year period by an average of 0. 5 degrees Celsius per decade.  In some lakes,  temperatures rose by as much as 1. 3 degrees Celsius in 10 years. This warming process slows the cyclical exchange of water layers in the lakes.   Because warm water is lighter, it tends to remain on the surface of the lake,  with cooler, heavier water remaining on the bottom.  But during the period of  the year when surface temperatures fall, the water layers rotate and mix in a  cycle that transports oxygen and other nourishing elements throughout the  lakes. Depending on the size of the lake, the exchange cycle takes place once or  twice a year.  'But when the surface waters are warmer and remain so longer  during the year, the cyclical exchange of waters slows down or does not occur  at all,' Karsten Rinke, director of the department of lakes at the German  Helmholtz Centre for Environmental Research, told IPS. For biodiversity living at the bottom of the lakes, slowing down the exchange  of waters can be fatal.  'After a while, there is no more oxygen on the bottom, leading to the death of  fish and other species,' Rinke said. One example of this devastation can be seen in whitefish (Coregonidae) that  hatch at the bottom of lakes.  If there is no oxygen, the new generation of fish  literally drowns at the moment of birth.  In addition, many living organisms time their metabolic processes to each  other - fish spawn during periods when the proper fodder is available, for  example. 'Many of these cycles are temperature-led,' Rinke explained.  'The rising of  water temperatures provokes incongruences in the habitats the species are  not accustomed to. 'Another problem caused by the rising of surface water temperatures in lakes  is the proliferation of algae.  When surface water is too warm, algae grow at an  exponential rate, covering large surfaces of the water.  Algae deplete the  water's oxygen supply, aggravating the consequences caused by the slowing  down of the water layers’ cyclic exchange. 'Furthermore, warmer waters attract alien species into lakes, which distort the  local chain food, crow out local species, and eventually destroy the habitats,'  Rinke said.  In recent years, the common basket shell, originally from South East Asia, has  become endemic in German lakes, affecting the local habitats. This is only one example of many instances where climate change is directly  responsible for environmental destruction: the rising lake temperatures have  consequences that are not yet fully known.  What is known, though, is that  biodiversity suffers as natural processes are disrupted by these environmental  changes.  And water temperatures continue to rise, foreshadowing disaster for the living  creatures that call Lake Constance their home. *This story is part of a series of features on biodiversity by Inter Press Service  (IPS), CGIAR/Biodiversity International, International Federation of  Environmental Journalists (IFEJ), and the United Nations Environment  Programme/Convention on Biological Diversity (UNEP/CBD) - all members of  the Alliance of Communicators for Sustainable Development.   