In one of the most environmentally damaged areas of Brazil's Mata Atlântica  forest, work is under way to reforest a watershed that supplies Rio de Janeiro,  while also establishing a 'reforestation' market that stimulates local job creation  and local consumption. Gilberto Pereira, executive director of the non-governmental Terra Institute  for Environmental Preservation (ITPA), told IPS that the initiative taking place  in south-central Rio de Janeiro state, northwest of the city of Rio, began with  a dual mission: to achieve regional importance and to generate income.  The Santana River Environmental Protection Area was chosen because the  river is one of the main tributaries of the Guandú River, which supplies water  to 80 percent of the Rio metropolitan area, home to 10 million people. Progressive deforestation is compromising both the quality and the  production of water, because just 30 percent of the original forest cover  remains intact. This part of Rio de Janeiro state is also an economically stagnant area.  In the  past, the forest was cleared to create pasture for cattle, which was then  supposed to drive economic development.  But currently, said Pereira, 'we  have an economy that has stalled. 'That is why by creating a reforestation market, 'in addition to reforesting the  most devastated areas, we can generate employment and water supplies,' he  said. The strategy was to hire local workers -- many who otherwise had unstable  jobs or were unemployed. The 35 women and men now have a formal job contract and benefits, earning  much more than the minimum wage, and they don't have to travel long  distances to their worksites. 'Reforester' Eurilene Martín embodies all of the project's objectives. She defines herself as 'mother and father at the same time' because she is  raising her children on her own; she used to work as a domestic employee in  the city, which meant long hours of commuting; and she lost her own home  on the banks of the Santana River due to the effects of deforestation. 'I knew that without the protection of the trees, the ravine would give way as  it rained.  And that's what happened: the soil came crashing down onto my  house like an avalanche,' she told IPS. Now Martín is working to make sure that doesn't happen again.  She earns a  good salary and is doing something that 'makes me feel very happy. ' As she  prepared to join other workers in loading native tree seedlings to take to the  deforested areas of the Mata Atlântica, she made her position clear: 'This isn't  work, it's a lifelong project. 'The tree nursery is located on land belonging to the rail worker and telephone  worker unions, which provided the site as their contribution to the  reforestation initiative. Marilene Ramos, environment secretary of Rio de Janeiro state, underscored  that the rural landowners are also doing their part by allowing the seedling to  be planted on their land and making a commitment to keep the forests  standing. The Guandú River watershed is home to the pilot programme of payments for  ecosystem services.  'The landowners who give over an area for reforestation,  who reforest what they have or preserve remnant forests, receive money twice  a year for that preservation,' Ramos explained to IPS. To contribute to the creation of the ecological market that Pereira mentions,  the project is also utilising the local workforce for planting and collection of  seeds.  The effort is producing results.  In just three months, the reforesters planted  about 100,000 native trees, among them is the species that was named  Brazil's national tree in 1978: the Brazilwood, or Pau-Brasil (caesalpinia  echinata). It is an endangered species.  Some historians say the tree was originally  utilised to extract a colouring used in red dyes for textiles or paint, known as  brazilin -- the Portuguese' first exploitation of natural resources when they  reached these lands in the 16th century. 'I had seen something on TV about the Pau-Brasil tree and wanted to know  what it was like.  And now I am the one who is planting it and caring for it.  I'm  on the other side of the television,' laughed Martín, proud of her work.  The tree seedlings reach their destination on the upper slopes of deforested  hills.  After travelling by truck, they are transferred to horseback for stretches  inaccessible to vehicles. The mud from recent rains slowed the trek up the hill on the day IPS  accompanied the workers.  But on the barren hillsides that once were part of  the Mata Atlântica, one of the world's richest biomes, the reforesters tirelessly  set to work -- a seemingly archaeological effort to recuperate the biodiversity  of the past. They unload the seedlings from the horses, dig a small hole, and carefully  plant what Martín says is the future: 'Each tree is the hope that someday  everything will be better. 'LIFE STARTS WITH WATERThe reforestation work means preventing soil erosion, and therefore  preventing landslides along the river.  It will also keep water sources like  smaller tributaries from drying up and will improve the quality of water  consumed by the people living in Rio de Janeiro.  ITPA has calculated that what the Rio water treatment plant spends in three  months to remove impurities would be enough for a year of payments to all of  the rural landowners in the Guandú watershed for preserving their forests and  maintaining the associated 'environmental services. ''Today the river has very serious erosion and landslide problems.  The  riverbank vegetation helps reduce that problem of sedimentation, of erosion  of the watershed,' explained Ramos.  ITPA holds up the initiative as an example that environmental preservation  and social development don't have to be contradictory efforts. While reforestation improves soil quality, stabilises the regional microclimate,  fights global warming by capturing carbon, and improves potable water  quality, it also 'provides a greater monthly income for dozens of families,'  states the institute in several of its documents. It is a change that also spurs activity in the local market, building an economy  that will help prevent the usual country-to-city migration by those desperate  for jobs, according to ITPA. This is what ITPA director Mauricio Ruiz defines as 'a beginning of an  ecological economy, a one-way journey,' in a similar vein to what Martín had  summed up as 'planting the future. ' 