'It sounds nice, but it’ll be tough to implement'; 'the most  important thing is to translate into reality': These  statements by rural women leaders in Colombia sum up the  reaction of activists to the government’s decision to revive  and refinance a special fund for projects in the countryside  led by women.  The scepticism has deep roots in a country where the rural  population has been devastated by five decades of armed  conflict, which has displaced millions of small farmers, and  where rural women are marginalised and made invisible by a  patriarchal system. In addition, government projects aimed at supporting farmers  have typically ended up benefiting large landowners. Minister of Agriculture and Rural Development Juan Camilo  Restrepo announced that the government would allocate  850,000 dollars to rural women’s initiatives in 2011, to  begin redressing the neglect they have faced from the state. The funds will be channeled through the Rural Women’s  Development Fund (FOMMUR), which has been left without  financing over the last four years. The funds aimed at bolstering women’s participation in  agriculture form part of a number of government initiatives,  including the creation or revival of programmes,  aimed at  developing the rural sector in Colombia. 'The more than eight-year-old Law on Rural Women has not  even been codified yet,' Restrepo complained.  'Public  policies to benefit rural women lack institutional  development and there is a lack of coordination among the  different state agencies involved,' he added, in an  assessment in line with the complaints of associations of  small women farmers. 'To make this change a reality, it is important to take into  account the fact that rural women face a number of  disadvantages characteristic of patriarchal societies,'  Yulieth Tamayo, a member of the Colectivo de Mujeres  Pazíficas, a group of women activists in the western  agricultural province of Valle del Cauca, told IPS. One reflection of this 'patriarchal society' is that land is  registered in the names of women’s husbands, fathers or  brothers. Another hurdle that disproportionately affects women is the  requirement that farmers wishing to obtain government funds  or credit must present a number of documents, for which they  must travel to the nearest large city, or 'even to Bogota' - - which is especially difficult, if not impossible, for  women with young children, Tamayo explained. To make opportunities for farmers more equally available to  women, 'projects for cultural and educational changes, as  well as mechanisms for oversight of how funds are handled,'  are needed, she argued. 'The announcement is fabulous, but they also have to offer  support and advice on how to best use the funds,' said  Ángela Orozco, a farmer in Usme, a rural area at the  southern edge of greater Bogota. Orozco, who comes from a peasant family displaced from the  northwestern province of Antioquia by the armed conflict,  puts great stock in preserving the customs and traditional  farming methods of her forebears, and combines her work in  the countryside with her profession as a schoolteacher. In the gardens surrounding her house, she grows uchuva fruit  (Cape gooseberry), onions, fennel, marigolds, beets,  lettuce, cilantro and camomile, for her family’s consumption  and for sale in nearby farmers markets. And in Ciudad Bolívar, a poor neighbourhood strung along the  hills on the south side of the Colombian capital that is  mainly home to people displaced from rural areas by the  civil war, she promotes the cultivation of fresh produce in  child care centres and preschools, where children not only  learn farming skills but grow food for their own meals. Orozco believes that peasant farmers, especially women, must  be empowered to take on leadership roles, as the only way  for them to leave behind their longstanding neglect by the  authorities and victimisation by different armed groups. Over the last half century, the rural population in this  South American nation has been largely abandoned by the  state and has suffered the effects of an armed conflict that  has basically been waged in rural areas, where the state  security forces fight left-wing guerrillas. But even before the emergence of the main insurgent group,  the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC), in 1964,  the countryside was caught up in the violence between the  conservative and liberal parties, and later in the crossfire  between not only the insurgents and the army, but also far- right paramilitaries, drug cartels and traffickers of  emeralds. And one of the main objectives of the conflict has been  possession of land. The result: one of the largest and most silent rural  exoduses in the recent history of the world.  Since 1985,  some 3. 3 million people in this country of 44 million have  been forced off their land and deprived of at least two  million hectares. In 1950, 70 percent of the population lived in rural areas,  compared to 26 percent -- 11. 7 million people -- today,  according to projections based on the 2005 census.  But although women and girls represent just over half of the  rural population, 'their significant contribution to the  national economy, and to the country’s food sovereignty in  particular,' is ignored, says Infogénero, a local NGO that  mobilises women peasant farmers in defence of their rights  and against machista and other kinds of violence. Restrepo, who was named agriculture minister by President  Juan Manuel Santos, in office since August, said women must  be taken into account because of 'their business sense,  their sense of austerity, their ability and inclination to  save, and the priority they put on the needs of their  families. 'He also underlined that women in general are better at  paying off loans, and 'have a greater sense of community,'  which means that protecting their economic and social rights  has a valuable multiplier effect. But on her farm, Orozco, like other farmers, remains  sceptical.  'Governments don’t care about peasants, which was  proven by what happened with the AIS: they left the peasant  farmers without funds,' she said. She was referring to the scandal over the government's Agro  Ingreso Seguro (AIS —'stable farm income') programme, in  which farm subsidies and soft loans for farmers ended up in  the hands of wealthy landowners, under right-wing president  Álvaro Uribe (2002-2010). The ongoing investigation of the corruption scandal has  found that from 2007 to 2009, government funds allocated to  large landowners were 27 times greater than what went to  peasant farmers, 70 percent of whom live in poverty. The beneficiaries of the AIS programme included agribusiness  producers of cut flowers, palm oil, bananas and sugar cane,  and transnational corporations like Coltabaco, Philip  Morris’s affiliate in Colombia, which received 16. 5 billion  dollars in credit. 'The AIS programme will now be at the service of small and  medium-size farmers,' Minister Restrepo promised.  'And we  are working hard to make micro-credit a tangible reality for  the rural sector. 'He also predicted that 'the big beneficiaries of this  refocusing (of government farm policies) will be young rural  entrepreneurs, and women who live and work in the country’s  rural areas. '  (IPS/LA DV IP AG BO HU WO/TRASP-SW/HM/EG/10) 