The loss of marine biodiversity is hurtling forward at an unprecedented rate.  At  present, the FAO calculates that nearly 80 percent of the world’s fishery  resources are fully exploited, overexploited or depleted.  Furthermore, marine  scientists have suggested that if the current pace of exploitation continues, all  fish stocks will have collapsed or disappeared by 2048. Measures put in place to manage marine resources have failed miserably.   They have not only driven oceans into a critical state from an environmental  perspective, but have also taken a socioeconomic toll on people and  economies around the world.  Eight percent of the global population supports  itself directly or indirectly through the fishing industry, and over one billion  people from the world’s poorest countries depend on fish as their main  source of animal protein. The European Commission acknowledges that 88 percent of stocks for which  data exist are being exploited above sustainable levels.  Meanwhile, our taste  for fish continues to grow, and the biggest challenge that we must now face is  how to balance our growing appetite with the proper management of the very  oceans that provide for us.  The EU has a responsibility to its fishers, its  citizens and future generations, to reverse its tendency to overexploit and  badly manage our resources. A comprehensive approach - tackling the factors that contribute to the  destruction of marine ecosystems, which include overfishing, habitat  destruction, pollution and climate change - is essential for turning the tide on  the state of European (and global) oceans and fisheries. The simple solution to overfishing is to fish less and more responsibly, and to  start making changes now.  By reducing catches today and fulfilling the EU’s  commitment to achieve 'maximum sustainable yield' by 2015, fishing stocks  will be given a chance to recover, thereby increasing tomorrow’s fishing  opportunities by up to 80 percent.  Unfortunately it is not only a matter of  reducing quotas, but also of limiting fleet capacity, enforcing gear selectivity,  curbing illegal fishing, developing scientifically sound management plans, and  creating marine sanctuaries where endangered populations can rebuild and  thrive again. One logical place to begin is curbing fishing practices that lead to high by- catch and discards rates.  Every year, 7. 3 million tonnes of catches worldwide  are discarded - an amount close to the entire African continent’s annual  seafood consumption. In Europe, the news is just as bad.  Recently, disturbing - though not  surprising - reports reveal that upwards of 1/4 (some estimate 1/2) of North  Sea catches are thrown back into the water, dead or dying. Improving gear selectivity, such as using larger mesh sizes to allow juveniles  to escape, is therefore a critical component of any proper management plan.   It also plays an important role in preventing the destruction of habitats.   Bottom trawlers, for example, which destroy entire seabeds in search of only a  few species, should be phased out. Meanwhile, illegal fishing still occurs.  During annual at-sea expeditions,  Oceana has observed and reported numerous ships in the Mediterranean still  using driftnets - destructive fishing gear that was banned in 2002 by the EU. Member States also sometimes overshoot quotas, as was the case with France  in 2007, when it fished 5,192. 6 tonnes over its annual bluefin tuna quota.   Unless we have stricter enforcement of existing rules, objectives for  sustainable management simply cannot and will not be met.  What is worse is  that EU subsidies themselves are sometimes unknowingly funding illegal  activities. With regards to the European fleet fishing illegally outside of EU waters, in  addition to the obvious detrimental impact this has on marine ecosystems  unable to handle the added pressure, it also prevents developing countries  from benefiting from the bounty of their own seas. To bring stocks back to acceptable levels, it is critical that a network of  marine protected areas (MPAs) be developed, particularly in essential habitats.   Besides environmental benefits, studies have demonstrated that these areas,  which enable the regeneration of habitats and reproduction of species, are  also economically profitable in the medium and long term.  MPAs have been  shown to cause a biomass spill over into surrounding waters as protected  populations grow, thus increasing the size and volume of nearby catches. The UN Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD) requires that a minimum of  10 percent of oceans be protected by 2012 - but countries around the world  are failing miserably at meeting these objectives.  In fact, the recent CBD  meeting in Nagoya pushed back the 2012 target to 2020. At present, less than 1 percent of the world’s oceans are in some way  protected, although barely even 0. 1 percent is fully protected.  Meanwhile only  4 percent of the world’s ocean surface is considered to be 'safe' from human  impact. The fisheries industry, marine ecosystems, and the livelihoods of millions are  inextricably linked and must therefore all be considered in management  plans.  Unfortunately, current measures are simply not up to the task and  often ignore scientific advice when it is available.  In 2010, 48 percent of  scientific recommendations on Total Allowable Catches (TAC) for EU fish  stocks were ignored, and recent ministerial decisions on fishing opportunities  for 2011 ignored 35 percent of recommendations. Of course, none of this matters if regulations, quotas and TACs are not  enforced.  One of the greatest flaws of the current system is that too many  countries and vessels are getting away with breaking the rules.  This cannot go  on any longer. Finally, another factor affecting the state of the world’s oceans is climate  change.  Rising temperatures affect the abundance and distribution of species,  and threaten vibrant coral reefs, through a phenomenon known as ‘coral  bleaching’. Meanwhile, as more CO2 is pumped into the atmosphere, oceans, which act as  filters for the planet, absorb too much of the gas, creating a phenomenon  known as ocean acidification.  This makes it harder for many organisms to  build their calcium carbonate shells and skeletons, and prevents coral reefs  from growing properly. Restoring the oceans to their previous glory is a daunting task.  The list of bad  news seems endless, but real solutions do in fact exist.  That is why we must  not sit by and do nothing - the time to make these changes is now. *Ricardo Aguilar is the Scientific Director at Oceana, the largest international  conservation organization dedicated exclusively to the world’s oceans. 