Few are aware that close to one billion people in over 100  different countries are suffering from or severely threatened  by intense desertification.  Yet awareness is crucial, for it  is human behaviour that has led to the proliferation of hyper- arid, uncultivable drylands over the past few decades. As vast amounts of land are increasingly lost to  desertification, the United Nations General Assembly  declared the United Nations Decade for Deserts and the Fight  Against Desertification (UNDDD), scheduled to run from  January 2010 to December 2020 to raise awareness and develop  action plans to protect the drylands. On Thursday, the European Launch of UNDDD was held in  London, home to scores of NGOs, think-tanks and advocacy  organisations dedicated to combating land degradation and  promoting the sustainability of deserts.  Researchers, activists and policy experts gathered to share  knowledge, strategies and perspectives on the crisis,  working within the framework that 'A decade is time enough  for change. 'Jointly organised by the U. N.  Convention to Combat  Desertification (UNCCD), United Nations Environment  Programme-World Conservation Monitoring Center (UNEP-WCMC),  and the International Institute for Environment and  Development (IIED), the European Launch earmarked the  culmination of the 2010 calendar year for the Decade,  including events in Fortaleza, Brazil; Nairobi, Kenya;  Seoul, Republic of Korea and Colorado, United States. Following the disappointments in Cancún and the failure of  countless international treaties to stem land degradation,  the Decade presents the international community with an  opportunity to act swiftly and urgently to deal with the  crisis. The drylands are home to one in every three people on earth.   Some of the world's most dire issues - from biodiversity and  food production, to energy extraction and famine - converge  in the drylands.  They are an ancient and natural sanctuary to some of the  rarest species of animal, bird and plant life on the planet.   According to reports from the UNDDD, 'one in every three  crops under cultivation today has its origins in the  drylands. ' They also support half of the world's livestock. The poor of China, sub-Saharan Africa and Central Asia  currently bear the brunt of desertification.  Last year the  BBC reported that desertification in those areas could  displace up to 50 million people by 2020.  Experts say the  impending crisis of mass migrations, Internally Displaced  Persons (IDPs) and climate refugees fleeing drought and  famine can no longer be ignored. The European launch focused closely on some of these issues,  and sought to highlight the points of intersection between  bio-preservation and human safety. Johannes Kamp, from the Royal Society for the Protection of  Birds, told IPS, 'We work in Eastern European and Central  Asian drylands and biodiversity there is very strongly  linked to land use.  Human behaviour in those areas has a  huge impact on animal and bird life, especially livestock  herding, overgrazing and agriculture. ''So if you want to preserve biodiversity in these areas you  have to get people on board and start talking seriously  about sustainability,' he added. Despite the fact that our entire ecosystem relies on a  delicate balance of wet and dry lands, industrialised  farming has been, and continues to be, the greatest  perpetrator of desertification in the world, he noted. 'We do a lot of work in agricultural landscapes in the  former Soviet states,' Kamp told IPS.  'A lot of the farm  land was abandoned after 1991 and this was beneficial to  biodiversity, but now much of this land is being taken back  for food production - mostly cereal - and cultivation there  is driven by world market prices.  The demand for food is  increasing and this has a huge impact on biodiversity in  those areas. 'Luc Gnacadja, the executive secretary of the UNCCD, spoke  gravely about the political and humanitarian implications of  desertification. 'Climate change is one of the root causes of political  conflict from Iraq to Afghanistan,' Gnacadja told IPS.  'The  crises in these regions are not accidents - they are caused  by paltry living conditions, and a lack of access to  productive land and water for life.  Surely a battle over the  bare necessities inevitably leads to conflict. 'As with most other climate-related catastrophes, the world's  ethnic minorities, nomadic communities or other  marginalised, impoverished groups pay the highest price for  a problem they did the least to create. To that end, Gnacadja added, it is absolutely imperative  that the UNDDD allow ideas, strategies and information on  desertification to flow directly from the grassroots into  the sphere of the political elite. 'The stakeholders here are not corporations or even the  governments,' Gnacadja told IPS.  'They are the farmers, the  herders, the people who are living and working in the arid  areas.  They must be allowed to communicate their ideas on  what 'works' and what does not. 'While the U. N. 's latest initiative has marked out a positive  course of action, current numbers and trends on the rate and  scale of desertification are ominous, raising serious  questions about the viability of sporadic schemes to deal  with the magnitude of the crisis. According to reports from a U. N.  University (UNU) conference  on desertification, 'Africa may only be able to feed a mere  25 percent of its population by 2025, if soil degradation on  the continent continues at its current pace, and nearly 75  percent of the continent could come to rely on some sort of  food aid by that time. 'It seems that a more holistic, radical change in economic  and social conditions is required in order to truly address  the issue of desertification. 'The industrial revolution and the spread of urbanisation  were the first factors leading to the current degradation of  the top soil,' Gnacadja told IPS. 'In the last 50 years, human beings have done more damage to  the earth than in all of human history combined.  It is  possible that by 2050 we would be required to increase food  production by 70 percent.  We must reverse that tendency. . .   We must act now for the next generation,' he said. 