In the summer presidential campaign, fake posters of two leading candidates  showed up on the streets of Polish cities.  'United we stand, divided we fall', the  slogan of now president Bronislaw Komorowski, became 'United we stand,  modified we fall'.  Equally bombastic 'Poland is most important' by opposition  leader Jaroslaw Kaczynski turned into 'Poland without GMO is most important'. Greenpeace was trying to turn the attention of both politicians and their  electorates to the danger of genetically modified organisms (GMOs). Most political actors in Poland declare their opposition to GMO crops.  The  question is how an EU member can stand up to the more liberal position of  Brussels, without breaking the law. First, by September 2005, the campaign by the International Coalition to  Protect the Polish Countryside managed to galvanize the boards of all 16  provinces in Poland to declare themselves a 'GMO Free Zone'.  The Assembly  of Marshals of the Polish Provinces said in a statement that 'approval for  cultivation of GMOs can damage the public image of the Polish countryside,  which nowadays is considered as the source of healthy, ecological and high  quality food. 'There was one problem: the declaration lacked any legal base.  The European  Commission’s (EC) position was clear: no local authorities could ban GMOs. Then, in April 2007, came a more serious challenge: the Polish government  notified the EC of its plan to prohibit the planting of genetically modified  plants by law.  Any cultivation would be obliged to take place within  designated zones, with heavy restrictions. As expected, the EC ruled that the Polish government would not be allowed to  do this because 'Poland did not present any new scientific evidence that  would justify such a ban. 'Unfortunately for the Commission, it notified Warsaw two months after the  deadline.  This mistake allowed Poland to take the EC decision to the European  Union Court of Justice in Luxembourg.  On Dec.  9 the Court ruled in favour of  Poland: the silence of the EC meant consent to the ban.  The case may now go  to the tribunal of appeal. The importance of the verdict is disputable.  'Poland is a GMO free country  now,' Maciej Szpunar, Foreign Ministry undersecretary of state, who  represented Poland in the EU Court of Justice, told IPS.  'This is a big  precedence. 'But anti-GMO groups claim this optimism is misleading.  According to Roman  Sniady of GMO Free Poland, the verdict refers to an old draft bill 'that has  nothing to do with the present situation in Poland. 'Joanna Mis, coordinator of the Polish Greenpeace anti-GMO campaign, agrees  that the verdict 'once introduced into the law, opens the way to GMO ban. '  However, 'even without this verdict the government could have implemented  the ban of the two GM varieties authorized in Europe: MON810 corn and  Amflora potato,' Mis told IPS. That is what six governments - France, Austria, Greece, Germany, Hungary  and Luxembourg - have already done.  The EC failed in attempts to block their  decisions. Meanwhile, Greenpeace warns that GMOs could encroach into Poland through  the back door.  The current law forbids trade with modified seeds, but farmers  are allowed to sow grain for their (supposedly) own needs.  Because of this  regulatory gap nobody knows the acreage of GMO crops: some estimates put  it at 3,000 hectares, others say it is double this. Anti-GMO sentiment is gaining ground not only in Poland, but across most of  Europe, at least since the mid-1990s.  The Euro-barometer opinion pool,  carried out across Europe this year, found 61 percent of respondents  believing the development of GM food should not be encouraged, with 23  percent in favour. That only two GM crops had been authorized for commercial cultivation in EU  in the last ten years (with 15 more awaiting approval) shows the level of  resistance.  But it is not even.  The Euro-barometer research showed significant variation  between member states, with the UK, Ireland, Spain and Portugal being the  biggest supporters of GM food.  On the opposite pole are Greece, Cyprus,  Lithuania and France. Trying to exploit the divisions and to overcome the stalemate, the  Commission recently proposed giving member states the ability to restrict or  prohibit cultivation of GM crops on their territory on grounds other than those  covered by EU health and environmental risk assessments.   If implemented, this project, while authorizing GMO-free zones, would give a  green light to modified crops in some other parts of Europe. This, however, looks unlikely, since the proposal met with increased  opposition by EU members, including Poland, and faces accusations over its  legality. The tug-of-war goes on.  In November the restrictive provisions for the  cultivation of GM crops in Germany have been upheld by the country’s Federal  Constitutional Court.  The court has also ruled that a farmer who grows GM  plants will continue to be liable for any economic loss caused by  contamination of conventional crops. Earlier this month, Greenpeace and the environment group Avaaz handed the  EU executives more than a million signatures on a petition calling to ban GM  crops until a new independent, ethical, scientific body is set up to assess their  impact.  This is seen as a test case of the new 'European citizen's initiative',  which enables one million Europeans jointly to ask the EC to change  legislation.  Not so fast.  The Commission has said the petition could not officially be  regarded as a European citizen's initiative until the detailed rules for how this  new mechanism would work were finalized by governments and lawmakers. The petition may be a false start, but the contest over one of the most  controversial pieces of EU policy is far from over.   