 According to Vision 2030, which is a government strategic plan on how to boost  growth and development in Kenya, there are an estimated 5 million out of an  estimated 8 million households who depend directly on agriculture, despite the  fact that agriculture continues to be one of the most under-budgeted Ministries.  ale.  Under the current financial year, agriculture has only been awarded a meagre  3. 6 percent of the national budget, which a long way off the 10 percent mark  that the government had committed to set aside for the agricultural sector.  With an overdependence on agriculture for both subsistence and commercial  purposes, a large number of the population is in dire need of food aid.  Aid organisations such as the World Food Program (WFP), an estimated 1. 6  million Kenyans face starvation.  The situation has deteriorated due to drastic climatic changes, whereby the  rains are no longer reliable and most Kenyans are yet to adapt to innovative  and sustainable means of trapping rainwater.  According to the Kenya Food Security Meeting (KFSM) - the main coordinating  body that brings together food security actors in a forum to map out various  strategies to improve food security - while there has been a notable  improvement of short rains in severely drought-affected pastoral areas, there  have been a general rain failure in the country since 2007, which has resulted  in the deterioration in food security. It is against this background that researchers have intensified research on  crops that can grow in most parts of the country and which can be used to  alleviate food insecurity. This has led many Kenyans to accommodate traditional vegetables that were  earlier dismissed as the 'poor man’s crop'.   'These vegetables grow easily and for many people they are seen as weed  and only the very poor would turn to them for food.  They are, however, very  nutritious and I grow them on my farm together with the more modern crops  like kales,' explains Tabitha Njoki, a small-scale farmer from Juja County,  Central Kenya. This change of attitude towards traditional vegetables can be traced back 20  years ago when Professor Mary Abukutsa Onyango, now a Lecturer in Jomo  Kenyatta University of Agriculture and Technology, pioneered extensive  research in traditional vegetables such as African eggplant, nightshades and  cow peas. 'The research was inspired by my experience of having had to live on  vegetables since I was a child because I was allergic to animal proteins.  I  therefore know that traditional vegetables are rich with nutrients and are easy  to grow,' explains Prof Mary Abukutsa.  'I wanted my research to improve the uptake of traditional vegetables and to  help farmers earn a living from selling the crops. 'Her research in African traditional vegetables has revealed that the  introduction of exotic vegetables such as asparagus and broccoli in Kenya  has, as is the case with many African countries, had a negative effect on the  consumption and commercialisation of traditional vegetables. 'Exotic vegetables have a market, but largely among the rich.  They are  expensive and therefore marginalise Kenyans who live below the poverty line,  and who account for an estimated 60 percent of the rural population,  according to government reports such the Kenya Health Demographic Survey  of 2009,' explains Nduati Kigo, an Agricultural Officer in Central Kenya. He adds that since the available exotic vegetables are out of the reach for the  ordinary Kenyan, and with limited available options due to the lack of  mainstreaming of the traditional vegetables, food insecurity remains a reality  for many households. The negative impact is to such an extent where 'in the area of crop research,  traditional vegetables have only gained recognition at the national, regional  and international level only recently,' adds Professor Abukutsa. Her research has been multifaceted and has involved solutions to the  negative attitude towards traditional vegetables.  This has necessitated her to  provide instructions on how to grow various vegetables, as well as provide  recipes on how to prepare them. 'Over the years, I have trained 77 contact farmers in Western Kenya and 23  farmers in Central Kenya on seed production of traditional vegetables, with an  objective of following their progress closely and also having them as role  models to promote and reposition what had been previously dismissed as  food for the very poor but has been proved to be very rich in nutrients,'  expounds Prof Abukutsa. She further explains that due to concerted efforts from various stakeholders  to popularise traditional vegetables, they are now available in restaurants,  markets and even supermarkets and people do not have to travel to the rural  areas to access them. However, the Professor explains that there is still a lot of ground to cover for  Kenyans to accommodate traditional vegetables as a food option to an extent  where farmers can turn to them for cash crop on a large scale.  