Returning home from work recently, farmer Baidhar Singh was  aghast to find his thatched hut in Balasore district, Orissa  trampled to the ground.  Just a few hundred metres away stood  the culprits, huge and grey against the darkening sky: a herd  of 65 wild elephants.    That was a few weeks ago.  Up till now, Singh and his wife  are still calling a polythene-covered lean-to home.     Singh’s experience has become quite common in the eastern  Indian state of Orissa in the last five years.     Forest department records show that from 1994 to March  2004, there were 2,888 instances of elephant depredation.  In  the last six years, however, the number of cases of  elephant-caused damage to life and property has nearly  doubled, including the death of 402 people and the  destruction of nearly 8,900 hectares of crops.    It is not as if Orissa’s elephant population is rapidly  increasing.  At 1,886, according to the 2010 elephant census,  the number of elephants in this state can be said to have  just inched up a bit from the 2007 figure of 1,862.    Yet Forest and Environment Department chief conservator  Debabrata Swain observes, 'Just five to seven years back,  movements of wild elephant herds were limited to 18 of  Orissa’s 30 districts.  Over this short period they have  spread to 28 districts. ' This in turn has led to less-than- pleasant encounters between man and elephant, with the puny  human being often at the losing end.    Then again, that’s because man has encroached on the  elephant’s habitat.  Specifically, experts are pointing to  monoculture afforestation and mining as the major reasons  why elephant enclaves here in Orissa have become  compromised.    Orissa has 10,000 square kilometres or 57 percent of the  elephant habitat in central India — one of 10 in the entire  country.  Forests in the state have 127 species of forest  vegetation, of which the elephant feeds on 75.     Elephants need a mix of vegetation in their diet to  remain healthy.  Experts say that when their nutrient needs  are met, elephant herds keep to their habitat.  They cite as  example the 400 elephants in the well-protected, 2,750-sq km  Simlipal tiger reserve, which are rarely seen outside of  that area.    But much of Orissa’s degraded forests are now being used  for monoculture afforestation by community conservation  programmes, meaning a suddenly limited choice of fodder for  the elephants.      At the same time, there is the Compensatory Afforestation  Management (CAMPA), which now makes compensatory plantations  compulsory for forestland users.     Worries Sheo Sharan Srivastava, forests chief conservator  of the Orissa government: 'Such afforestation could result  in monoculture plantations. '   As it is, the official says, 'While elephants are not  going hungry, their diet is increasingly lacking in  nutrients due to the loss of mixed vegetation once available  in their dense forest habitat, one of the reasons for  increased movements and attraction to crops. '    One monoculture afforestation favourite is the ‘Shorea  robusta’ — known locally as ‘sal’ — whose wood is a popular  building material.  The species provide elephants shelter as  well, and the animals scale back the tree bark to lick the  moisture during the summer.  Unfortunately, though, ‘sal’  does not provide fodder.    An adult elephant requires 150 kilogrammes of wet weight  fodder daily.     Meanwhile, elephants are also being displaced by mining,  especially in northern Orissa, which is rich in iron,  manganese, and chromite deposits.  Open-cast mining in  forests there has been growing over the last decade, forcing  elephants to migrate.    Interestingly, Keonjhar and Sundargarh districts, which  have seen the fastest growth in their local mining  industries in recent years, have also the highest number of  man-elephant incidents in this state.     Speaking generally, the August 2010 report of the  Elephant Task Force of the Federal Ministry of Environment  and Forests says that due consideration is simply not given  to an industrial project’s ecological and social impact.  'In  most cases,' it adds, 'the mandatory Environmental Impact  Assessment is done overlooking the impact of the project on  migration of animals and the ecological sensitivity of the  area. '    Researchers call the elephants’ venture outside their  habitat to forage for food as 'obligate crop raiding'.  When  habitat loss, fragmentation, or degradation severely reduces  a habitat’s size or quality within a home range, the  affected elephant herd will resort to raiding crops for  sustenance, says Orissa government senior researcher  Sudhakar Kar.    Lack of resources or nutrients result in starvation,  reduced fecundity and calf survival, all of which lead  eventually to the extinction of the affected elephant clan,  adds Kar.    The federal government has prioritised five of the  country’s 10 elephant habitats for a more integrated and  comprehensive conservation strategy.  Among these is the  East-Central habitat, which extends over 17,000 sq km across  Orissa, Jharkhand, and southern West Bengal.    Under the Elephant Management Plan, Orissa received a 40  million-rupee (882,000 dollars) allotment in 2010.  The state  has appointed 51 elephant depredation squads, which include  98 elephant trackers who inform villagers about elephant  herds moving in their direction and teach them about the  appropriate action to be taken.    Six ‘kunky’ or trained elephants have been employed to  drive back herds into the forests.  Along with intelligence  gathering from villagers regarding 'wildlife crimes',  elephant-proof barriers are being erected in vulnerable  areas.    India has about 29,000 elephants.  The giant mammal has  lately been viewed as a keystone species in the Asian  tropical forest that can act as an umbrella or flagship for  conserving biodiversity.  