The recent successes of local medicinal researchers have  turned the spotlight on local laws that fail to protect  Jamaica's rich biological diversity. Two days after Lawrence Williams announced an international  patent for an anti-cancer compound from the guinea hen weed,  another local scientist Henry Lowe, announced that a  compound from the Jamaican ball moss was ready for clinical  testing - extracts from just two of the 334 Jamaican plants  that have so far been investigated for medicinal properties. Williams, a zoologist with the government-owned Scientific  Research Centre (SRC), discovered a protein complex,  dibensyl triulphide, which has the ability to kill a range  of cancers including melanoma, lung and breast cancers, he  told IPS.  Jamaican biochemist Dr.  Lowe and his research partner Dr.   Joseph Bryant's impending clinical trial of a nutraceutical  from the Jamaican ball moss or old man's beard (Tillandsia  Recurvata) for treating prostate cancer was greeted with  excitement and some scepticism.  Before now, the plant had  been regarded by most Jamaicans as parasitic, overrunning  trees and becoming a nuisance on power lines. Many believe that such native plants could yield high  quality medicinal or nutraceutical extracts much like the  high quality of Jamaican coffee, cocoa, ginger and pimento.   Now more than ever, Jamaican environmentalists are concerned  that without adequate protection, local biodiversity is at  risk of exploitation by rich nations or destruction by  developers.  'There is nothing to protect plants.  We have no Red List  data,' biologist Andreas Oberli told IPS, referring to the  absence of recent information for the World Conservation  Union's (IUCN) list of threatened species.  Jamaica's Natural Resource and Conservation Authority and  the Wild Life Protection Acts, the pieces of legislation  that govern the preservation of the island's biological  resources, are almost silent on plant species.  Only plants  that were listed in the past by the IUCN are covered, and  flora on private lands do not benefit from even the limited  protection of the acts.  The result, Oberli said, is that 'much of the island's  biological treasures are being lost to development,  especially in the coastal areas where pristine forests and  caves are being destroyed to construct hotels. ' In the  hinterlands, farmers are destroying the forests, he said. Jamaica's rich biological diversity makes it fifth in the  world in terms of endemism.  But of the more than 3,300  species of flowering plants here, only 200 have been  catalogued.  According to the National Environment and  Planning Agency (NEPA), charged with preserving the island's  biodiversity, about 923 of the known plants are found only  in Jamaica. Under the CITES wildlife treaty, NEPA issues permits only to  applicants with a Jamaican specialist on the team.  The  agency also requires that specimens be deposited at the  Institute of Jamaica, which houses the Jamaica Clearing  House Mechanism, said zoologist and UWI life sciences  lecturer Karl Aiken. But with the number of species in some families of plants  still unknown and new species being discovered every year,  local scientists say the value of the island's biological  diversity is still vastly unknown.  Many are seeking an  economic assessment of in particular areas with high levels  of endemism, but to date, only limited project-based  assessments have been done. Oberli is concerned that much of the island's biological  diversity is being lost to development before it can be  recorded or discovered.  He described the nature reserves  declared by government as 'paper parks'.  One example is the  protected Palisadoes peninsula, where a highway is being  built in the single known habitat of a rare endemic cactus.  Jamaica's medicinal research often derives from traditional  remedies, such as Cannabis sativia, said to improve the  eyesight of fishermen or used by grandmothers to ease asthma  in children; Cerasse, a variety of Momordica charantia, long  used to treat diabetes and cure bellyaches, among other  ailments; breadfruit for hypertension.  Plant research in Jamaica dates back 129 years, but natural  products research began in 1948 with the founding of the  University of the West Indies (UWI), Mona Campus.  Since then  scientists have tested the acumen of local bush doctors,  studying hundreds of plants and testing 193, including 31  endemics for their for bioactivity or chemical compounds  that remain stable during testing. The UWI Group reported that close to a quarter of the  endemics tested had bioactive compounds. In 1987, pharmacology professor Manley West and his partner,  the ophthalmologist Dr.  Alfred Lockhart, successfully  developed Canasol for the treatment of glaucoma, Asmasol for  bronchial asthma and Canavert for seasickness.  All three  were derived from locally grown varieties of the Cannabis  sativa, locally known as ganja. In 2008, the pair was again successful with yet another  cannabis-derived medication Centimal — the world's first  combination of an alpha agonist and beta-blocker for the  treatment of glaucoma. With the establishment of other local universities and now  the Bio-Tech Research and Development Institute, a  collaboration between the three oldest universities - UWI,  the University of Technology, the Northern Caribbean  University (NCU) - and the SRC, there have been even more  successes.  At Central Jamaica's NCU, scientists have investigated the  cancer fighting properties of sorrel (Hibiscus sabdariffa),  used to make Jamaica's traditional Christmas beverage.  Grown  in three varieties here, sorrel yields a compound that  researchers say could spark breakthroughs in the treatment  or cure for lung and liver cancers. The NCU also found that garlic causes lung and liver cancer  cells to shrink and eventually die. Researchers at the UWI are studying the effect of local  herbs on lifestyle diseases including hypertension, diabetes  and glaucoma.  Jamaica's rates of prostate cancer;  hypertension and diabetes are among the highest in the  world. The problem Jamaican researchers now face, Lowe said at the  Dec.  2 launch of the island's newest research entity, 'is  staying ahead of the competition''.  With the naming of the plant from which the extract is  taken, Lowe and others worry that large companies will  produce commercialised versions of the compounds before they  do. For example, periwinkle was traditionally used to treat  diabetes for many years until local scientists isolated a  compound to treat cancer.  Their work was used to develop  what are now the world's leading leukemia drugs (Vinblastine  and Vincristine), without acknowledgement of Jamaica's  intellectual property. But despite the challenges of a cash-strapped government,  high-cost patents and inadequate protection of the  biological resources, researchers are forging ahead and hope  that legislation will, in time, catch up.  *This story is part of a series of features on biodiversity  by IPS, CGIAR/Biodiversity International, IFEJ and UNEP/CBD,  members of Communicators for Sustainable Development  (http://www. complusalliance. org). 