Eight Pacific island nations that are leveraging their  contracts with foreign fishing fleets to save the world's last  great stocks of tuna are getting little sympathy from the  countries representing those fleets. The islanders, gathered in the Parties to the Nauru  Agreement, have told the fleets that get 85 percent of the  region's canned tuna from their Exclusive Economic Zone,  which extends out 200 nautical miles from their coast, that  starting next Jan.  1, they can no longer fish in an m-shaped  body of international waters south of Hawaii.  The measure applies to purse-seiners, which scoop up about  three-quarters of the Pacific's tuna in their nets — up to  200 tonnes at a time — and sell them to canneries, mostly in  Asia.  Long-lining vessels, which use baited hooks to catch  different tuna for the fresh and sashimi market, are to be  phased out of the area, called the Eastern High Seas pocket,  in a few years. The combined moves will create a no-fishing zone the size of  India, by far the biggest in the world, which scientists say  will become a magnet for overfished species.  This will help  stem the decline of the Pacific tuna, which are increasingly  targeted by the international fleets that have depleted the  species in the Eastern Pacific, Atlantic and Indian oceans. Earlier this month in Honolulu, at the yearly meeting of the  Western and Central Pacific Fisheries Commission, the United  States, already under criticism for its fisheries policies  in the Pacific, declined to support the measure, reserving  for itself the right to be the only nation to fish in the  area, which is 3. 2 million square km. The U. S.  has the right to do so, even while other fleets are  forced to reduce their catch, under a treaty that expires in  two and a half years. 'We will be very disappointed if the United States does not  cooperate with us,' said Sylvester Pokajam of Papua New- Guinea, the spokesman for the Nauru group.  Its members are  the Federated States of Micronesia, Kiribati, Marshall  Islands, Nauru, Palau, Papua New Guinea, Solomon Islands and  Tuvalu. Charles Karnella, the chief delegate to a fisheries meeting  here, said the United States had not decided what to do  because it is negotiating an extension of the South Pacific  Tuna Treaty with the island nations.  'How the closure is  dealt with is part of the negotiations,' he said. Two years ago, the United States had strongly backed the  closure by the Nauru group of two pockets of international  waters further west totaling 1. 3 million square kilometres.   As a result, the members of the fisheries commission, which  include the Nauru eight as well as distant fishing nations  like Japan, China, Taiwan, Spain and the U. S. , unanimously  approved the closure, along with other measures to stem the  decline of the world's last major stocks of tuna.  The U. S.   has abided by that closure. But this year, according to fisheries scientists, the  situation of the tuna has worsened.  Not only have the 2008  measures failed to stop excessive fishing, the catch rose by  over 30 percent. The stocks of bigeye tuna, which can reach 2. 5 metres and  weigh 180 kg, are particularly depleted: experts estimate  that there are only 17 percent left of the original stock's  breeding-age population.  The bigeye is, after the fast- disappearing bluefin (which swims in colder waters), the  most valuable because it is prized by sushi lovers for the  fattiness of its flesh.  Young bigeyes like to swim with adult skipjack, a smaller,  more abundant species preferred by canneries.  In the new  closure area, the proportion of bigeye caught in the nets of  purse seiners is about 30 percent. 'The closure is first a measure to save the bigeye,'  explains Pokajam, the spokesman for the Nauru grouping. This year, the Nauru group reduced the number of days of  purse-seiners can fish in their waters in 2011 by a third in  another attempt to curb overfishing. Scientists say that while the long-line fishery of bigeye  might be sustainable alone, the 80,000 tonnes of bigeye  yearly caught by the purse seiners is what's driving the  species to collapse.  They have been calling since 2008 for a  reduction in the total catch of bigeye of 30 percent, with  no success. It is against this backdrop that at the commission meeting,  South Korea and the European Union voiced strong opposition  to the fresh measure, which New Zealand supported while the  United States remained silent.  As a result, a decision on  the measure was simply pushed to next year. The United States now has 36 purse-seine ships in the  Pacific.  About a dozen are based in the Central Pacific and  bring their catch to a cannery in American Samoa.  The others  are Taiwanese ships operating entirely near Asia that were  allowed to take up the U. S.  flag a few years ago, freeing  them from the constraints the Nauru group imposes on its  clients. The U. S.  benefits from the move have never been explained,  and the U. S.  representatives have declined to discuss the  matter. Under the treaty, U. S.  taxpayers cover most of the license  fees paid to the island nations, a subsidy unmatched by any  other nation.  In exchange for unfettered access of the 40  ships, the U. S.  distributes $18 million in development aid  to 14 pacific nations. The treaty, signed in 1997, has been denounced as outdated  and unfair by most island nations. 