Just two years ago, Ratha Majhi was at his wits’ end trying to  eke out a decent living from his modest vegetable farm.    'It did not matter how long I spent at the farm,' he  recalls.  'Even after borrowing 54,000 rupees (1,200  dollars), my trying days seemed never-ending. '   But since then he says his life has changed, adding with  pride, 'The farm is now my own patch of green paradise. '   It’s all thanks to a simple and cheap micro-irrigation  tool.  Indeed, since 1994, the treadle pump has been changing  the lives of millions of farmers in this country, where some  60 percent of the population are estimated to be directly  involved in farming.    Made of iron, the treadle pump is similar in principle to  a hand pump.  But instead of the latter’s single barrel or  cylinder and the use of hands to pump water, the treadle or  pedal pump has two cylinders and uses foot power to lift  water from underground.    'Most farmers in India are able to grow just the monsoon  crop,' says Amitabha Sadangi, the man behind this wonder  pump.  'If they have a reliable irrigation system throughout  the year, they could, even on their small patch of land,  grow up to three crops annually. '   The treadle pump is, in fact, one of two micro-irrigation  gadgets developed by the Sadangi’s Delhi-based International  Development Enterprises, India (IDEI) specifically for  marginal farmers who tend to crops that occupy less than a  hectare.      The other is the drip irrigation tool that was designed  for use in southern and western India, where the water table  is usually found only below 30 metres.    The treadle pump, meanwhile, is suited to regions with  high water tables, such as here in eastern India.  To use it,  one drops the attached pipe into a dug well, or a river or  hill spring, and then starts pedaling.  An hour’s pedaling  can pump out as much as 5,000 litres of water.  Two hours’  pedaling would be enough to irrigate half a hectare of dry  season vegetables.     Sadangi, 51, comes from a poor family here in Orissa  state.  Knowing firsthand the hardships subsistence farmers  in these parts go through while trying to keep their crops  irrigated, he says he became interested in manually operated  treadle pumps in Bangladesh.  Pretty soon, he had adapted the  technology to suit local requirements.    One nifty feature of IDEI’s treadle pump, for example, is  that it is foldable.  At 18 kilogrammes, it is also portable  — a necessity for most small farmers who have non-contiguous  farmland holdings.    Tapan Pattanayak, IDEI’s chief general manager for the  firm’s eastern India operations, says that operating the  pump is 'so easy that even a child, (female) elders, and  even disabled people' can do it 'by manipulating the body  weight on two foot pedals or treadles and by holding a  bamboo or wooden frame for support'.    'One may even sit and pedal,' he says.     Nabin Amanatya, 35, can attest to the pump’s user- friendliness.  Afflicted with polio, he struggled for years  farming his family’s spit-sized plot that reached a mere  tenth of a hectare.  Then in 2006, he bought a treadle pump.     His neighbours teased him when they saw him trying to  make a go with the pedals.  But he was soon tending a  thriving garden of cucumber, ridge gourd, and lady’s finger  — vegetables that are very popular in the local market.   Within two years, Amanatya had repaid his father’s loan and  had switched to better seeds and fertilisers.    'Now my family eats fresh vegetables and household  expenses are met out of the income from vegetable sales,' he  says.  'I have plans to purchase a bicycle after constructing  the house.  I have also decided to get an electricity  connection for our house. '   IDEI, which is a non-profit venture, made it a point to  make the treadle pump as well as the drip irrigation  affordable for marginal farmers.  While the pump costs  between 550 to 2,000 rupees (12 to 44 dollars), the drip  irrigation is priced at 4,000 rupees (88 dollars).    Commercial irrigation equipment would costs much more.   A  diesel pump, for example, goes for at least 40,000 rupees  (880 dollars).  And then there would be the recurring diesel  expenses.     Says Sadangi: 'Affordability is crucial.  Marginalised  farmers cannot invest much more than their labour.  We keep  the cost and maintenance as low as possible. '   But Pattanayak admits that some farmers are still finding  the treadle pump and the drip irrigation beyond their means.     'With bankers’ loan ticket size not less than 10,000  rupees, farmers are facing difficulty getting loans to buy  these equipment,' he says.  'Steel prices, too, have trebled  the original treadle pump’s price tag over the last few  years. '   Sadangi, however, is poised to disburse loans to half a  million farmers by next year.  The scheme would involve a  nano-finance (smaller than a micro-finance) company with 20  million dollars from U. S. -based financier JP Morgan.    IDEI has also tied up with JP Morgan up to 2014 to sell  carbon credits at seven cents annually per unit from the  fuel-saving treadle pumps.  It sold 1. 7 million tonnes carbon  equivalent between 2004 and 2007 alone, and has received  87,000 dollars in total so far from the arrangement.     Sadangi is now busy working on low-cost sprinklers and  water storage tanks, as well as looking into solar and wind  pumps — still with the small farmers in mind.   