The U. S.  Congress banned shark finning in all U. S.  waters  Tuesday, a victory environmental advocates are hoping sends a  message to international regulators. The law will require all sharks caught in U. S.  waters to be  landed with their fins still naturally attached, outlawing  the practice in which fishers cut off sharks' fins — the  most lucrative part of the animal — and dump the mutilated  shark back into the water to sink and eventually die. Demand for shark fins has been growing in recent decades due  to the expansion of the middle-class in China, where the  fins are used in soup. Previously, the U. S.  had finning restrictions in force for  its Atlantic and Gulf of Mexico waters.  This legislation  extends that ban to the Pacific. The bill had been approved by the U. S.  House of  Representatives in April 2009 but the Senate's approval did  not come until Monday.  Tuesday, the House approved the  Senate's version. The law does not ban the sale of shark fins in the U. S. ,  but, according to Matt Rand, director of the Pew Environment  Group's global shark conservation work, it 'leaves the door  open' for trade restrictions by the U. S.  at some future  point on countries that do not have comparable regulations  on shark finning. It also leaves open a small loophole for a specific shark  fishery — smooth dogfish off North Carolina, along the  U. S. 's southeastern coast. But after three years of campaigning, activists are just  happy the legislation finally made it to the finish line. Between when the bill was first introduced in April 2008 and  now, 145 million sharks have been killed, according to Pew  Environment.  Coupled with the fact that sharks are slow- growing and produce relatively few young since they mature  later in life, this rate of harvest can be particularly  harmful to shark populations. Shark finning at sea allows fishing vessels to harvest many  more fins at one time than they would be able to if they  kept the rest of the shark carcass — and its usually much  less valuable flesh — onboard.  But the new U. S.  law will  prohibit U. S.  vessels from having any shark fins on board  that are not connected to the carcass, thus hopefully  slowing the demise of shark populations and preventing what  is seen as a cruel and wasteful practice. Internationally, activists hope this law will propel the  U. S.  into a leadership position on shark conservation at  international negotiations. Rand said this policy gives the U. S.  a mandate to push for  similarly strong bans globally.  'This is not only a federal  policy but also mandates that the U. S.  carries this torch to  international negotiations and to other countries,' he said. The new law caps a busy year for international shark  conservation activists.  In March, delegates to the Convention on International Trade  in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora, or CITES,  decided against proposals that would have prohibited or  significantly curtailed international trade in eight species  of shark. That was despite the urgings of the U. S.  and other  countries, including the island nation of Palau, which in  2009 went further than the U. S.  has gone and banned all  fishing for sharks in its waters. In October of this year, the Maldives followed Palau's lead  and banned shark fishing in its territorial waters.  Both  countries' decisions were said to be motivated as much by  the economic gains of tourism as by the ecological benefits  of maintaining a healthy population of apex predators. Studies have shown sharks to be worth up to hundreds of  thousands of dollars a year in tourism, as opposed to tens  of dollars when caught. 'We've finally realised that sharks are worth more alive  than dead,' said Elizabeth Griffin Wilson, a marine  scientist and fisheries campaign manager at the conservation  group Oceana, in response to Tuesday's U. S.  legislation.   'While shark fins and other shark products are valuable, the  role sharks play in the marine ecosystem is priceless. 'These arguments may be starting to gain traction at  international negotiations such as the annual meetings of  the International Commission for the Conservation of  Atlantic Tunas (ICCAT), which is responsible for overseeing  the conservation of tunas and species directly affected by  tuna fishing — sharks are often caught as bycatch — in the  Atlantic. The most recent ICCAT meeting, in November, agreed to ban  the taking of oceanic whitetip sharks by fishers and to  significantly restrict that of hammerheads.  Both species are  highly prized for their fins and have seen their populations  in key waters drop significantly in recent decades. At the time, Pew Environment's Rand credited the  conservation victory to criticism policymakers received  after CITES failed to restrict trade in the species. Tuesday he said he hopes the U. S. 's new anti-finning policy  helps raise the global profile of the need for shark  conservation. 'The U. S.  now has a national policy that fins must be  naturally attached for all sharks caught and landed — an  issue that has come up repeatedly in the last five years in  international negotiations, including at ICCAT,' he told  IPS, but 'unfortunately [domestic policies] alone will not  stop the decline of shark populations. '