Wikileaks cables have revealed a disturbing development in the African uranium  mining industry: abysmal safety and security standards in the mines, nuclear  research centres, and border customs are enabling international companies to  exploit the mines and smuggle dangerous radioactive material across  continents. The Wikileaks cables reveal that U. S.  diplomats posted in a number of African  countries - the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC), Tanzania, Niger, and  Burundi, among others - have had direct knowledge of the poor safety and  security standards in these countries' uranium and nuclear facilities. The cables also highlight the involvement of European, Chinese, Indian, and  South Korean companies in the illegal extraction and smuggling of uranium  from Africa.  Most European nuclear reactors use uranium imported from  African countries. In one classified document, dated Sep.  8, 2006, the U. S.  embassy in the DRC  capital Kinshasa reported that several U. S.  diplomats and security service  personnel toured the Kinshasa Nuclear Research Centre (CREN-K) on Jul.  27  that year in order to assess the facility’s security needs. CREN-K houses the DRC’s two nuclear reactors.  Neither reactor is currently  functioning, but staff conduct nuclear-related research and teaching at the  facility. Although inactive, CREN-K stores significant amounts of uranium and nuclear  waste.  This radioactive material includes 138 nuclear fuel rods, at least 15 kg  of enriched and non-enriched uranium, and some 23 kg of nuclear waste. At CREN-K, 'external and internal security is poor, leaving the facility  vulnerable to theft,' Roger A.  Meece, U. S.  ambassador to DRC, reported in the  2006 document.  Meece's detailed description of the security measures at CREN-K suggests  that security is not just 'poor,' but non-existent.  According to the report, the  fence surrounding CREN-K 'is not lit at night, has no razor-wire across the  top, and is not monitored by video surveillance. 'There are numerous holes in the fence, and large gaps where the fence was  missing altogether,' Meece wrote.  'University of Kinshasa students frequently walk through the fence to cut  across CREN-K, and subsistence farmers grow manioc on the facility next to  the nuclear waste storage building,' he added.  In March 2006, an International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) contractor using  a Geiger counter detected elevated levels of radiation in this manioc plot. According to the cable, none of CREN-K buildings have sophisticated locks,  intrusion alarms, motion detectors, or video surveillance systems.  'Once inside the facility, no one controls the entrance to the nuclear reactor,  although a key is required to enter the room,' Meece wrote.  'The fuel rod storage room, where the nine unused fuel rods are stored, was  not locked, and the fuel rods are not kept in a separate locked container. ' But security gaps in nuclear and radioactive facilities in the DRC go beyond  CREN-K.  In a separate cable, dated Jul.  11, 2007, Meece reported that several  sources 'recently stated that the Malta Forest Company is (illegally) mining  and exporting uranium from the DRC. 'According to the report, the company is 'mining the uranified rock while  mining copper and cobalt, then exporting the uranified ore and circumventing  radiation testing by using an established system of corrupt government  officials. 'Meece explained that foreign companies purchase the uranified ore and refine  it abroad to separate the uranium, copper, and cobalt.  'In this way, foreign companies purchase uranium from Malta Forest, while  Malta Forest appears to be exporting copper and cobalt,' he wrote. In 2006, for example, two Finish companies, Opolo Chemicals and Konkola  Chemicals, reportedly told the IAEA that they imported one ton of uranium  from the DRC.  The DRC, however, claimed that it did not export any uranium  in 2006. In addition, the cable warns that high levels of radioactivity have been  measured in numerous regions of the DRC.  'All of Katanga Province could be said to be somewhat radioactive,' Meece  reported.  Katanga is the country's southernmost province.  With an area of 518,000  square kilometres, Katanga is 16 times larger than Belgium, and holds a  population of more than four million people.  In the cable, Meece refers to research carried out in May 2007 in the Luiswishi  mine, located approximately 20 km northwest of Lubumbashi, the region’s  capital city.  After analysing 100 kg of rock samples from the mine, a scientific  commission from Kinshasa found 'dangerously high levels of radiation existed  at Luiswishi mine, and that the mine operator …was suppressing this fact to  continue mining operations. 'The mine operator is the Mining Company of South Katanga (CMSK),  predominantly owned by the Malta Forest Company. The cable also refers to several other findings of high radioactivity and  corruption in other Congolese uranium mines, operated by Chinese and South  Korean companies.  These mines are staffed by 'artisanal diggers' - a  euphemism for local workers extracting uranium and other radioactive  material without enjoying any health protection. Other U. S.  classified cables revealed by Wikileaks report cases of smuggling  uranium and other radioactive material in Tanzania, Burundi, Niger, Portugal,  and Georgia.  Meece continues to serve in the DRC, as head of the U. N.  mission.   