 Agriculture remains one of the most significant economic activities in Kenya.  It  accounts for over 24 percent of Gross Domestic Product (GDP) with an estimated  70 percent of total production coming from small scale farmers who typically  have about 2-5 acres of land, depending on the region.    But in spite of encouraging economic growth rates over the past decade,  Kenya continues to face serious challenges in meeting the Millennium  Development Goal (MDG) 1 of eliminating extreme poverty and hunger.  Various Government reports show that over 50 percent of children under five  years are underweight and/or are suffering stunted growth. 'Although the situation might seem bleak the government has, as a result of  innovations by researchers, made various attempts to improve the  agricultural sector, particularly in the field of horticulture,' explains Naomi  Chepkorir, an Agricultural Officer from the Rift Valley Region which is Kenya’s  bread basket. According to the Policy Paper in the Horticultural Industry, the outcomes of  accelerating the growth of horticultural production should encompass  aspects such as alleviating poverty and improving food security. 'With regard to vegetable production, the government is working closely with  researchers to not only improve the quality of vegetables but to also diversify  the variety,' explains Catherine Kuria, a small scale farmer in Kinale, Central  Kenya.  Crop experts have established that the best kale in the entire country comes  from Kinale, in Central province. Kale is also popularly known as 'sakuma wiki', a name that loosely translated  means that it can sustain people throughout the week due to its extreme  affordability, particularly for those who earn a dollar and below a day.  It is  thus the single most popular and available vegetable.  'In spite of its popularity, varieties of kale available to farmers are generally of  poor quality, yield easily to diseases and their production is also low,'  explains Catherine Kuria. Vegetables are grown by an estimated 90 percent of Kenyan households, with  Kale accounting for the highest production.  In a bid to improve food security and consequently alleviate hunger, Kenyans  can now enjoy new varieties of kale that are more productive and can cope  better with the unpredictable climatic changes across the country. In May this year, the Kenya National Variety Release Committee authorised the  release of two varieties of the improved kale seed and were published by the  Ministry of Agriculture, as is stipulated in the Kenya’s Seeds and Plant  Varieties Act.  Three more varieties will be released into the market once they are finally  approved.  This is a result of a seed-bulking project funded by the Center for  Agricultural Bio-Science International (CABI) Africa, which is a science-based  organisation specialising in agriculture. 'Seed bulking is an innovative strategy to increase access to reliable seed  varieties at a rate affordable to particularly small-scale farmers who may not  have the funds to buy expensive hybrid seeds. ' expounds Naomi Chepkorir.  'It is also a way of empowering poor households who directly depend on  agriculture for subsistence.  The new varieties are an improvement of the kale seed that is already in the  market and has been for many years. ' This innovation is a key development  in light of the United Nations proclamation that 2010 should be an  international year of biodiversity, which is basically the diversification of  animal and plants and a concept that underpins agriculture. The licensing of new kale varieties is also in line with a government  programme dubbed ‘Njaa Marufuku Kenya’ which basically means eliminating  hunger in Kenya . This programme supports agricultural development  initiatives targeting the poor in rural areas, where an estimated 60 percent  live below a dollar a day. The licensing of the new kale varieties has seen farmers, particularly from  central Kenya where kale is grown in plenty; speak in favour of the  innovation.  Alice Itoti from Central Kenya, one of the farmers involved in the process of  growing and testing these new varieties says that,  'I have been growing  vegetables for ten years and I have observed a huge difference between the  old and the new variety of kale.  The new varieties have bigger leaves and are  of a notably higher quality. ''They also give a higher production which is good for commercial purposes.   Most of my consumers who have tasted the old and the new prefer the new  variety. 'As the country continues to grapple with food insecurity, with a large  percentage of the population relying heavily on agriculture for both food and  cash crops, innovative strategies to diversify crops can be part of the solution  towards improving food options, and consequently contributing towards the  elimination of extreme poverty and hunger. 