The San Juan River, centre of discord and diplomatic conflicts between Costa Rica  and Nicaragua, is seeing its riverbanks fill up with economic projects that  scientists and environmentalists say will irreversibly alter its course. According to biologist Salvador Montenegro, director of Nicaragua's Centre for  Aquatic Resource Investigation, a hydroelectric project agreed between the  governments of Brazil and Nicaragua in 2007 would seriously harm the  biodiversity of the San Juan and the nature reserves in the surrounding areas. Montenegro said the planned Brito Hydroelectric project (Hidrobrito SA) would  require a dam 10 metres high and 400 metres wide to achieve the water level  necessary, and would reverse the natural draining of Lake Cocibolca (also  known as Lake Nicaragua) to the Caribbean, sending it instead towards the  Pacific Ocean. The project is still going through studies, but would be built in 2015, has a  price tag of more than 900 million dollars and, according to Nicaragua's  ministries of Energy and Environment, would generate 250 megawatts of  electricity. In Montenegro's view, the damage to the plant and animal species of the San  Juan would be 'catastrophic. ' The dam would affect the biodiversity of the  lake and the rivers, as well as the land, aquatic and marine ecosystems, and  the livelihoods of fishers and farmers living in low-lying areas. With the flow of freshwater to the Pacific, the coastal zone would lose salinity,  potentially harming thousands of marine and coral reef species.  It would likely  affect the migration of endangered sea turtles, which arrive there each year to  lay their eggs on the beach refuges of Chacocente and La Flor, in the southern  Nicaraguan department of Rivas. The company in charge of the project, Brazil's Andrade Gutiérrez  Construction, acknowledged to the Nicaraguan authorities that there would  be environmental damage, and proposed alternatives that the government is  now studying. According to the document 'Brito Hydroelectric Profile,' which the Brazilian  company presented to the government in June, the construction would affect  33 percent of the area of natural vegetation in the Indio Maíz biological  reserve. It is located in southeastern Nicaragua, along the San Juan River, covering an  area of 3,180 square kilometres. UNESCO (United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organisation)  declared the San Juan River a biosphere reserve in 2003.  The zone  encompasses a tropical rainforest, wetlands and lakes, with diverse wildlife,  on land and in the water: jaguars, eagles, toucans, macaws, manatees,  hammerhead sharks and crocodiles. It is also considered the area with greatest botanical diversity in the country  and the entire Central American isthmus. Furthermore, and according to the Andrade Gutiérrez company itself, the  hydroelectric project 'would cause changes in water quality and the  movement of sediments, with consequences for the aquatic ecosystems and  the health of the surrounding population. 'Brenno Machado Nogueira, marketing director of Andrade Gutiérrez in  Nicaragua, told Tierramérica that the builder hired an international company  to conduct the environmental impact study, and the results would allow them  to mitigate or correct the problems. But other threats are already looming over the nature reserve. Antonio Ruiz, executive director of the non-governmental River Foundation,  which monitors the socio-cultural and environmental life of the San Juan, filed  a complaint in November that the African oil palm crops were contaminating  the wildlife refuges and water sources, and overwhelming the native  vegetation. A study by the Foundation states that the area is undergoing expansion of  livestock, logging and plantations of African oil palm (Elaeis guineensis) and  melina trees (Gmelina arborea) in areas of tropical rainforest regeneration.  'About 50,000 hectares of broadleaf forest has been lost, and each year  deforestation continues at a pace of around 1,200 hectares,' said Ruiz.  The  destruction of the forest ecosystems since 1983 meant the loss of 60 percent  of the trees in the reserve's buffer zone, he said. According to ecologist Kamilo Lara, the deforestation on the Costa Rican side  of the river, as well as the use of agro-chemicals and the discharge of  wastewater are endangering the region's largest watershed. Studies conducted since 2005 reveal a serious level of contamination of the  San Juan by faecal matter, sediments and agro-chemicals from fruit  companies and cattle ranches on the Costa Rican side of the river, Lara told  Tierramérica. Costa Rica and Nicaragua are also currently embroiled in a conflict that San  José brought in November before the International Court of Justice, in The  Hague, denouncing Managua for alleged territorial invasion and  environmental destruction. In October, the Nicaraguan government, under President Daniel Ortega, had  ordered dredging in a part of the river that flows into the Caribbean Sea. According to the Costa Rican complaint, the Nicaraguan army set up  operations in an area that Costa Rica claims as its territory, and where alleged  acts of environmental destruction took place. The Court will hear preliminary arguments in the case on Jan.  11, 2011. Costa Rica is requesting a legal stay to halt the dredging activities and  prevent further damage to Isla Calero, a 151-square-km island located in the  San Juan River in an area of great ecological wealth.  Managua rejects the charges and argues that the dredging constitutes  temporary and 'minimal' damage, compared to the benefits of rehabilitating  the natural route that species travel from the Caribbean to Lake Cocibolca via  the San Juan. Meanwhile, other plans involving the river have been suspended.  The planned open-pit mine on Crucitas, a mountain in northern Costa Rica,  was called off by that country's legal authorities. And the plan to build an inter-ocean canal through Nicaragua (which dates  back to the colonial era) would include part of the San Juan River, but remains  at a standstill due to the lack of resources to conduct feasibility and  environmental studies. (*This story was originally published by Latin American newspapers that are  part of the Tierramérica network.  Tierramérica is a specialised news service  produced by IPS with the backing of the United Nations Development  Programme, United Nations Environment Programme and the World Bank. ) 