While China faces grave water shortages, researchers at  institutions across the country are working on new water- saving and desalination technologies that they hope can  alleviate the crisis in the crucial years to come.    Despite billions of dollars spent on damming rivers,  building reservoirs and digging deeper wells, farmers in the  north toil on parched land while hundreds of cities across  the country face water shortages and deteriorating water  quality.     Beijing’s water shortage will soon reach 200 million to  300 million cubic metres, according to state media reports,  as the city awaits the completion of the 62 billion U. S.   dollar South-North Water Transfer Project, which will  displace some 330,000 people.    The World Bank has warned that the country’s water crisis  could spark unrest, pitting rich against poor and urban  against rural.  Without serious changes in water use, tens of  millions of Chinese will become environmental refugees in  the next decade, the Bank argues.     Meanwhile, countries downriver from the growing  superpower — including Burma, Laos, Cambodia and Vietnam —  argue that China’s aggressive dam building in the Mekong  River is robbing their citizens of water.     For some, the answer lies in desalination technology.   China has been engaged in desalination research since 1958,  and in 1975 it began research on medium- and large-scale  distillation devices.  In 1986, it finished construction of a  seawater reverse-osmosis desalination device.     Tianjin, a coastal port city about 150 kilometres from  Beijing, has become a national leader in desalination  technology.  In fact, the city has refused water from the  south and instead focused on desalination efforts.  According  to the local government, the nearby Dagang Xinquan Seawater  Desalination Project is the 'largest seawater desalination  plant in Asia. '   'Indeed, the municipality has been developing  desalination technologies since the year 2000, and this has  been regarded as a more likely source of water to meet the  water supply needs of the municipality,' said a report by  Probe International, an independent environmental advocacy  group.      Wang Shichang, director of the Desalination and Membrane  Technology Centre at Tianjin University, says researchers in  China are currently working on more than 200 desalination  projects, receiving support from the Ministry of Science and  Technology and the National Science Foundation of China.     The centre that Wang leads introduced the first multi- stage flash (MSF) distillation devices, which distills water  through several 'multi-stage' chambers, each operating at  progressively lower pressures.  The vapor generated by  flashing is condensed at each stage and turned into fresh  water.  The technology uses 25 percent less 'feed water' than  other desalination devices, Wang says.     The country’s desalination capacity reached nearly  200,000 tonnes per day in 2008, up from 30,000 tonnes in  2005.  According to the government’s current development  plan, the figure is expected to reach 800,000 to one million  tonnes by the end of this year.     But Wang says support is still not enough.  He notes that  the gap between China’s innovation capacity and development  and manufacturing capabilities compared to those of foreign  countries remains vast.  He says greater state subsidies and  access to bank loans are needed to bridge that divide.     While Wang works toward creating new usable water, Tian  Juncang, a professor at Ningxia University, is trying to  reduce water wasted in agriculture.    Tian’s work focuses on using plastic mulch in conjunction  with drip irrigation to suppress weeds, maximise the  effectiveness of fertiliser and conserve water in crop  production.  Plastic mulch and drip irrigation can reduce the  amount of water used in irrigation process by up to 50  percent, Tian says.     China’s agriculture industry currently uses 70 percent of  all the country’s water, and much of it goes to waste, he  says.  Drip irrigation under plastic mulch can reduce the  industry’s use to 50 percent.     'China’s agricultural industry faces grave challenges,'  Tian tells IPS.  But by implementing new technology, 'the  current amount of water can support double the farming  land. '   The government has moved to promote water conservation.   In 2007, it issued it’s 11th five-year plan for water  conservation, proposing detailed targets, including  increasing the agricultural water conservation rate to 50  percent from 45 percent between 2005 and 2010.    But Tian says water conservation must be a systematic  effort with the support and cooperation of industry and  society as a whole.  Efforts to conserve water also require  increased funding from the state, improved laws and  regulations and more advanced and better-managed facilities,  Tian says.     'Agricultural water conservation efforts have been  strengthened in recent years,' he says, 'but it’s still not  enough. ' 