For decades, fisheries around the world have relied on practices that take for  granted certain assumptions about the industry, such as protecting younger fish  while exploiting older fish and using trophic levels to monitor the health of  fisheries.  Recently, however, some scientists have begun to question these  unanimously accepted practices.  Experts are beginning to think that the science  behind the global fishing industry may be completely wrong. One example of this re-evaluation can be seen in relation to conventionally  accepted practices whereby young fish are protected and older fish are  exploited.  Younger fish are generally smaller and weigh less than their older  counterparts, so policies rely on assessing fish population by biomass. For instance, in Iceland, certain areas will be closed to fishing when there is a  large proportion of small fish in the area.  Spawning and nursery areas will  likewise be protected. Defying convention, Prof.  George Sugihara and his team at the Scripps  Institution of Oceanography have begun to criticise the current scenario  whereby small fish are protected and large fish are caught.  They say that this  system can alter the age pyramid within a given fishery, such as pollock, by  removing the few, older fish that make up the top of the pyramid while  leaving a broad base of faster-growing, small young fish. Why does this pose a problem? 'It's not the young ones that should be thrown  back, but the larger, older fish that should be spared,' said Sugihara.  'Not  only do the older fish provide stability and capacitance to the population, they  provide more and better quality offspring. 'The danger, according to Sugihara, is that current policies that manage  according to current biomass targets while ignoring fish size pose risks that  can destabilise the entire population.  This instability can, in principle, affect  the whole ecosystem, magnifying risk for all ecologically related fisheries. This danger is especially prevalent when trying to rebuild fish stocks, Sugihara  said.  'Regulations based solely on biomass harvest targets are incomplete.   They must also account for age-size structure in the populations.  'Current policies and industry pressures that encourage lifting bans on fishing  when biomass is rehabilitated - but where maximum age and size are not -  contain risk,' Sugihara warned. In addition to the practice of exploiting fish based on biomass calculations,  other conventionally accepted practices in the fishing industry are beginning  to be re-evaluated by experts.  One such practice has to do with using trends  in trophic levels of fish to measure the health of world fisheries.  In 1998, using global catch data, stock assessments, scientific trawl surveys,  small-scale fishery data, and modelling results, scientists developed a  comprehensive test that used trends in the trophic levels of fish over four  decades to measure the health of world fisheries.  As the first of its kind, this  system for analysing the health of fisheries was considered groundbreaking. The trophic level of an organism shows where it fits in a food web, with  microscopic algae at a trophic level of one and large predators such as sharks,  halibut, and tuna at a trophic level of about four. Twelve years later, confidence in this method of assessment is waning.  A new  study, carried out by Trevor Branch from the University of Washington,  together with scientists in the U. S. , UK, Canada, and Australia, reveals  weaknesses in assessing ecosystem health from changes in the trophic levels  of what is being caught. Branch and his team based their findings on a large number of trawl surveys  that consider the numbers and types of fish that actually live in these  ecosystems, as well as catch data, to dispute the conventional wisdom. Branch explained that there are two major weaknesses in the accepted metric:  'One, in just under half of all ecosystems, this catch metric goes up when the  ecosystem gets worse, or goes down when the ecosystem gets better.  Two,  this metric can remain constant, even when increasing numbers of species are  collapsing in the ecosystem,' he said. The significance of these findings is crucial, Branch said, because 'the  measure is the most widely adopted indicator by which the overall health of  marine ecosystems is determined. 'For example, the UN’s Convention on Biodiversity uses the average trophic  level of fish caught as the main measure of global marine diversity.  'The 1998 paper was tremendously influential in gathering together global  data on catches and trophic levels, and it warned about fishing impacts on  ecosystems,' Branch said.  'Our new data from trawl surveys and fisheries assessments now tell us that  catches weren't enough.  In the future, we will need to target limited resources  in the best way, focusing on species that are especially vulnerable to fishing  and developing indicators that reflect fish abundance, biodiversity and marine  ecosystem health.  Only through such efforts can we reliably assess human  impacts on marine ecosystems. ' 