Farming around the globe, already reeling from drought, heat waves and major  storms, will have to prepare for the new challenges that global warming will  bring, especially in the form of pests and disease. In Brazil, the Climapest project has brought together 134 researchers from 37  institutions to evaluate the potential effects of climate change on crop health,  and to guide policies and provide options so that this South American and  global agricultural leader can adapt.  The changes in climate 'will not necessarily aggravate the crop diseases' in all  cases, because warmer temperatures or increased carbon gases could impede  the proliferation of certain microorganisms, but it is important to be ready for  future scenarios because 'generating solutions takes time,' explained Raquel  Ghini, project leader. The small problems of today could turn into huge crop losses under future  conditions, said the agronomist and plant pathologist, who works at the  Environment Centre under the federal government's agricultural research  agency, EMBRAPA. Funguses, viruses and other agents that are harmful to agriculture are among  the organisms that react fastest to changes in the climate, because of their  short life cycles and their ability to reproduce quickly. Climapest began in January 2009 and has a four-year mandate to study 85  problems of plant health affecting 16 crops, including major exports like  coffee, soybeans and fruit (banana, apple and grape), as well as African palm  and castor oils, both of which are gaining ground as raw material for  biodiesel.  Some of the aspects to be studied are the effects of increased carbon dioxide  in the atmosphere, as well as warmer temperatures, and ultraviolet B rays on  diseases, pests and invasive species. Predicting the future seasonal and geographical distribution of these enemies  to farm productivity is another goal of the research. For example, there will be fewer banana-growing areas in Brazil suffering the  disease that cuts into yields -- especially in the most pessimistic forecasts for  greenhouse gas increases -- said Ghini.  That is because with less humidity,  the black sigatoka (Mycosphaerella fijiensis) fungus would be less able to  spread, she explained. Meanwhile, the nematode Meloidogyne incognita (a type of roundworm) and  another pest known as the leaf miner (Leucoptera coffeella) will likely become  even more harmful to coffee, because rising temperatures will quicken their  reproductive cycle, making their infestations more intense. The project is drawing up maps that indicate the geographic evolution of the  enemies of each crop, according to the best and worst climate scenarios laid  out for 2020, 2050 and 2080, based on the five global models of the  Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC). By late 2012, Climapest hopes to have ready a series of maps and collated  data on the plant health risks, in order to guide decision-making strategies in  the different sectors, said Emília Hamada, second in charge of the project. These materials are also important for 'directing complementary research  efforts' and for genetic improvement of the crops aimed at improving  resistance to the worst pests and diseases, said Hamada, an environmental  researcher at EMBRAPA. Investigating 'one by one' the main health problems of each crop, and their  evolution according to climate hypotheses is a complicated endeavour.  In  general, warmer temperatures favour the pests, but 'there could be  exceptions if the temperature goes past a certain limit,' Hamada told  Tierramérica. In the case of the leafworm (Alabama argillacea), a caterpillar that attacks  cotton, researchers are still studying how it might react to global warming,  particularly whether or not it would speed up its reproductive cycle, she said. The response to the changes in the pests, diseases and invasive species will  initially involve agro-chemicals, because they are what is immediately  available, but for the long term biological methods should be developed, in  keeping with the 'new culture' and environmental trends, acknowledged  Ghini. Sometimes, creative solutions emerge for 'alternative controls. ' One such  example is the use of milk diluted in water to fight the powdery mildew  caused by Sphaerotheca fugilinea.  It is a 'cheaper method than fungicides,  with the advantage that it doesn't generate resistance' in the fungus, she  said. This fungus is vulnerable to the microorganisms found in cow milk, and just a  five-percent mix of milk with 95-percent water is enough to prevent the  disease, which whitens the leaves of grapevines, of leguminous crops and  various vegetables, weakening the plants by reducing their ability to  photosynthesise, Ghini explained. Powdery mildew is 'the disease of climate change': it spreads with the  increase in temperature and less moisture on the leaves.  But the milk mixture  antidote is inexpensive and easily accessible, leading many countries to  implement it.  Furthermore, because there is no patent on this method, anyone  is free to use it. The climate question has become a priority for EMBRAPA, a system of 42  research centres throughout Brazil, which in its 37-year history has had a  strong impact on the production of this agricultural giant, opening frontiers  for crops once considered impossible to grow in a tropical climate, like  soybeans. But what also needs research is the role of agro-chemicals in the proliferation  and dissemination of pests and disease, as funguses and other  microorganisms develop resistance to the chemical toxins, said Jean Marc von  der Weid, coordinator of the non-governmental organisation AS-PTA, which  provides technical consulting for alternative agricultural projects. The effects of a warmer climate are occurring in 'an environment that already  has imbalances caused by agro-toxins,' which feeds back into plant health  problems, which are then treated 'with more agro-toxins,' said the economist  and agro-ecology activist. A biological pest control developed by EMBRAPA, although welcome, 'has the  vice of turning into a 'clean agro-toxin',' by introducing new microorganisms  into the environment, Von der Weid told Tierramérica.  'The best prevention is  to maintain the natural balance, which reduces risk and damages,' he  concluded. (*This story was originally published by Latin American newspapers that are  part of the Tierramérica network.  Tierramérica is a specialised news service  produced by IPS with the backing of the United Nations Development  Programme, United Nations Environment Programme and the World Bank. ) 