Environmentalists have called for more efforts to protect the argun palm, a rare  desert tree prized by the ancient Egyptians that is on the verge of extinction. Less than 400 argun palms (Medemia argun) are known to exist in remote  desert regions of Egypt and Sudan.  Environmentalists say urgent action is  needed to protect the enigmatic fan palm, which is listed as critically  endangered on the IUCN (International Union for Conservation of Nature) Red  List of Threatened Species. 'These palms may be the remnants of vegetation that covered the Sahara over  10,000 years ago when the area was much wetter than it is today,' says  Haitham Ibrahim, an ecologist at the Egyptian Environmental Affairs Agency  (EEAA), the executive arm of Egypt’s environment ministry.  'They are now  critically in danger of extinction…(as a result of) climate change and human  activity. 'Archaeologists first learnt of the argun palm from ancient Egyptian texts, and  its dried fruits were frequently found among the gold and offerings recovered  from pharaonic tombs.  But it was long assumed that the prized palm had  vanished along with the pharaohs. Then in 1837, a German naturalist and explorer, Prince Paul Wilhelm von  Wurttemberg, stumbled across a previously unidentified palm species in the  wilds of northern Sudan.  Biologists recognised the mysterious palm as the  same tree whose fruit had been found in pharaonic tombs, and realised the  argun palm had somehow survived the centuries. But the future of the species was anything but certain.  While more of these  enigmatic palms were soon discovered in northern Sudan, by the early 1900s  it had once more disappeared into obscurity.  It was not until 1963 that the  species was sighted again — this time in the arid hinterland of southern Egypt.  Comprehensive surveys over the last two decades have revealed 30 individual  argun palms in Egypt, and several hundred living in northern Sudan. 'The argun palm survives, but its population is under heavy pressure,' says  Irina Springuel, professor of plant ecology.  'Unless protected, the species  could disappear — and this time for good. ' According to Springuel, the main population of argun palms in Sudan is at  risk of overexploitation by local tribes, who use the palm’s fronds to weave  rope, mats and baskets.  In Egypt, the species is threatened by drought and  increasing human activity. At Dungul Oasis, where a stand of 25 argun palms constitutes the only  productive wild site in Egypt, desertification has taken a toll on the local  population. 'There were 34 argun palms there when I began studying the species in  2000, so we have lost nine palms in the last 10 years,' says Ibrahim.  'Those  nine were seedlings that couldn’t survive; their roots couldn’t reach water. 'A more insidious threat is the steadily growing level of human activity in the  small oasis, which is located about 220 kilometres southwest of Aswan. During a visit last year, Ibrahim found that a fire had ripped through  vegetation at the eastern end of the oasis.  The blaze, believed to have been  set by careless hunters, came to within a kilometre of the argun palm cluster,  which includes the only two fruit-bearing females in the country. 'All of these argun palms grow in an area covering less than 100 square  metres,' says Ibrahim.  'One fire would be enough to destroy all of them. 'The EEAA is now studying a proposal to include the country’s main population  of the argun palm within a protected nature area.  The proposed protectorate  would cover between 6,000 and 8,000 square kilometres, encompassing  Dungul Oasis and nearby Kurkur Oasis. This remote, uninhabited stretch of desert is a refuge for the endangered  palm, as well as several threatened species of animals including Dorcas  gazelles, ostriches, and possibly small herds of Nubian ibex. Mahmoud Hasseb, EEAA’s director of South Area Protectorates, says the  decision to seek protected status was prompted by increasing human  activities in a vulnerable ecosystem beyond the purview of environmental  policing. 'For several years we’ve seen evidence of tourists and hunters visiting this  area,' he told IPS.  'When we visited in 2009, we collected the bones of dead  gazelles and found dozens of palm trees had been burned.  It became clear  that this ecosystem was at risk. 'Efforts are also under way to conserve the argun palm through an ex-situ  nursery programme established in 2003.  Environmental researchers at South  Valley University have successfully cultivated 21 juvenile palms in the  university’s conservation garden near Aswan.  It is hoped the palms will  produce viable offspring that can be transplanted to various desert locations  where the argun palm is historically documented to have grown. 'When the seedlings are strong enough we will attempt to reintroduce them to  the wild,' says Ibrahim. (*This story is part of a series of features on biodiversity by Inter Press Service  (IPS), CGIAR/Biodiversity International, International Federation of  Environmental Journalists (IFEJ), and the United Nations Environment  Programme/Convention on Biological Diversity (UNEP/CBD) - all members of  the Alliance of Communicators for Sustainable Development.   