The United Nations, which is trying to reach out to nearly a  billion undernourished people, some living in perpetual  hunger, is anticipating another food crisis later this year. And the signs of impending trouble have been there for some  time. The Rome-based Food and Agriculture Organisation (FAO)  warned last week that world market prices for rice, wheat,  sugar, barley and meat will remain high or register  significant rises in 2011 - perhaps replicating the crisis  of 2007-2008.   Rob Vos, director of development policy and analysis at the  U. N. 's Department of Economic and Social Affairs (DESA),  told IPS that higher food prices are already affecting many  developing countries. He said countries like India and a number of other East and  South Asian countries are facing double-digit inflation,  mainly caused by higher food prices - alongside higher  energy prices. In Bolivia, the higher prices for food in world markets  recently forced the government to reduce consumer subsidies  as these were running up the fiscal deficit too high.  The short-term implications are not only that the poor are  especially heavily affected - and that more people could be  pushed into poverty - but also that it will hamper the  recovery in the countries facing higher inflation as  consumers lose purchasing power, he noted. Some central banks are moving to tighten monetary policy and  governments are being forced to tighten fiscal policy, said  Vos, who is also the U. N. 's chief economist. Frederic Mousseau, policy director of the San Francisco- based Oakland Institute, told IPS that as early as last  September, Mozambique experienced food riots over high bread  prices. Some 13 people were killed during a protest against the  unaffordable price of bread, he told IPS. 'Food riots and civil unrest affected some 30 countries in  2008, and this can be repeated today since the situation has  not changed in the last three years,' said Mousseau, author  of 'The High Food Price Challenge: A Review of Responses to  Combat Hunger. '  The most vulnerable countries are those which are the most  dependent on food imports and the least able to handle high  prices in international markets through public mechanism and  public policy, he noted. This concerns many of the poorest countries, with fewer  resources, institutions and public mechanisms in place to  support food production or subsidise the food, Mousseau  said. Late last year, there were protests over high school lunch  prices in China and near-riots in Algeria over rising prices  of flour, milk and sugar. Algerians again took the streets last week to protest  economic conditions, including food prices, ending with  several deaths and hundreds of injuries.  Unrest also erupted  in neighbouring Tunisia. According to the FAO price index released last week, the  price of a basket of cereals, oil seeds, dairy, meat and  sugar has continued to rise for six consecutive months. Abdolreza Abbassian, an FAO economist, was quoted by a  London daily as saying: 'We are entering danger territory. 'Mousseau pointed out that food prices started increasing in  2010 following poor crops in Russia and Eastern Europe,  partly due to the wild fires in the summer. Now, the severe floods affecting Australia, the fourth- largest wheat exporter, are likely to hamper wheat  production there and to push prices up even more, he  predicted. 'Any other event, such as another climatic shock in another  exporting country or a further increase in oil prices, will  without any doubt boost prices up and make the situation  worse than in 2008, and thus threaten the livelihoods of  billions of people worldwide,' he added. Asked the reasons for the anticipated shortages, Mousseau  said: 'One cannot use the word shortage if you consider that  more than one-third of the cereals produced in the world  goes to animal feed and that a growing share of food  production is going to agrofuels. 'So there is no global shortage today, just as there was no  shortage in 2007-2008. The world actually produced 2,232 million tonnes of cereal  in 2008, a historic all-time production record, Mousseau  pointed out. The global production level for 2010-2011 is slightly below  the 2008 record, but with higher levels of global stocks. As opposed to 2008, he said, when rice initially drove the  global increase in cereal prices, in 2010-2011, it is wheat  prices that first started to increase following poor crops  in Russia and Eastern Europe. Similar to 2008, the rise in food prices is a combination of  different factors: a bad harvest in one part of the world  brings pressure on the market, which sends signals to  speculators, who start then to buy, which leads to further  price increases. The correlation between oil and food prices is once again  obvious: as seen in 2008, current high oil prices make  agrofuels more profitable and are therefore pushing more  food crops into the ethanol and biodiesel plants, Mousseau  said. 