It's hardly news that the U. S.  love affair with electronic  gadgets has a dark side.  The global toll on natural resources  and the potential health and environmental hazards are  staggering. In order to alleviate the mess, a San Diego-based start-up  company called ecoATM has rolled out a self-service kiosk  that enables shoppers to recycle unwanted electronic gear  safely, offering cash rewards and coupons to people willing  to part with unwanted cell phones and other electronic  devices.  After a successful 12-month trial run in San Diego's  shopping centres and other test sites in the U. S. , the  eponymous ecoATM kiosks are poised to become as much a part  of the retail landscape as coin-exchange machines did in the  1990s.  'It's just the tip of the iceberg,' said Mark Bowles, the  co-founder of ecoATM, speaking of the challenges and  opportunities cell phones present to recyclers. The kiosks work like an ATM in reverse.  The machine scans  and IDs the phones after they have been placed in a tray,  looking for broken keys and cracked faces.  After calculating  the value of the phone, it makes the consumer an offer on  the spot.  'People like the objectivity.  There's no haggling,' Bowles  told IPS.  According to Bowles, the average household has five to six  outmoded cell phones tucked away, worth an estimated 12. 2  billion dollars in recyclable materials - meaning there's a  treasure trove of phones to be found scattered around the  house.  A newer iPhone might fetch three figures dollar-wise,  whereas a disposable phone is barely worth the cost of  recycling. 'People want do the right thing,' said Bowles.  'We  incentivise it. ' Seventy-five percent of the cell phones are destined for  resellers who find a second life for them.  The rest become  industrial feedstock for the next generation of electronic  devices. ReCellular processes 400,000 used cell phones per month.   Scores of smaller companies are refurbishing cell phones for  reuse in U. S.  markets and overseas. 'The value of these phones is shocking when you begin to  think about it,' said Mark Newman, ReCellular's marketing  director. The need to recycle is twofold.  First, cell phones are  resource-intensive.  The raw materials are often extracted in  places at a far remove from the rule of law, taking a heavy  toll on political and biological hotspots.  A single cell  phone battery, for example, requires 3. 2 tonnes of cobalt  ore. Recently published accounts on the Wikileaks website  unveiled the more unsavory aspects of the mining trade,  enumerating a long list of facilities that the State  Department believed vital to U. S.  economic and security  interests.  Among them was a cobalt mine in the Democratic  Republic of Congo. Human rights activists contend that mining operations, both  legal and illicit, have destabilised the DR Congo, as  political factions engage in internecine turf wars for  control over mineral-rich regions in central Africa.  They  say the wealth generated from rare metals and so-called  blood diamonds is one of the primary drivers for the  corruption and violence roiling the region.  According to a 2008 report by DanWatch, a corporate watchdog  group based in Denmark, mobile phones accounted for 20  percent of cobalt consumption.  DR Congo accounted for 40  percent of the world's total cobalt production in 2008. Secondly, in coming years, landfills in the U. S.  can expect  to receive a tidal wave of e-waste, as the number of  obsolete cell phones grows and piles of PCs loom larger.   Cell phones have an average lifespan of 18 months and that  window seems to be shrinking, as the gap between a product's  novelty and obsolescence shorten.  There are an estimated 130 to 150 million cell phones  retired each year, generating 64,000 tonnes of recyclable  materials. Regulation is scant.  Twenty-four U. S.  states have outlawed  the improper disposal of e-waste in landfills, leaving a  patchwork of inconsistent guidelines and regulations in the  remaining states.  According to survey data, less than one  percent of cell phones are recycled. 'Whatever the percentages are, they're way too low,' said  Newman. Although discarded cell phones represent a small percentage  of the overall volume of e-waste in landfills, they can pose  an environmental and health hazard due to the presence of  high levels lead, cadmium, copper, and other hazardous  materials.  These metals comprise the guts of cell phones,  and when tossed into landfills, they can leach into the soil  as the phones deteriorate. Worldwide, the U. N.  reports e-waste is expected to grow  exponentially in developing countries as the use of PCs and  cell phones continues to rise.  According to the report,  China discarded 2. 3 million tonnes of e-waste each year,  second only to the United States in 2010. In China, cell phone e-waste is expected to increase seven- fold from 2007 levels by 2020, and 18-fold in India. Heidi Sanborn, executive director of the California Product  Stewardship Council, is adamant about the lack of leadership  cell phone companies have demonstrated thus far.  'They've privatised the benefit and socialised the costs,'  she told IPS. This leaves the market wide open for green entrepreneurs -  and shady operators working in the murky recesses of the  global economy. 