Famine-hollowed farmers watch trucks loaded with grain grown  on their ancestral lands heading for the nearest port,  destined to fill richer bellies in foreign lands.  This scene  has become all too common since the 2008 food crisis. Food prices are even higher now in many countries, sparking  another cycle of hunger riots in the Middle East and South  Asia last weekend.  While bad weather gets the blame for  rising prices, the instant price hikes of recent times are  largely due to market speculation in a corrupt global food  system. The 2008 food crisis awoke much of the world's investment  community to the profitable reality that hungry people will  do almost anything, even sell their own children, in order  to eat.  And with the global financial crisis, food and  farmland became the 'new gold' for some of the biggest  investors, experts agree. In 2010, wheat futures rose 47 percent, U. S.  corn was up  more than 50 percent, and soybeans rose 34 percent. On Wednesday, U. S. -based Cargill, the world's largest  agricultural commodities trader, announced a tripling of  profits.  The firm generated 1. 49 billion dollars in three  months between September and November 2010. Meanwhile, U. S.  Treasury Bills pay a return of less than one  percent. 'We have set up a global food system that supports  speculation.  And with [such] markets, we can't get  speculators out of the food business,' said Lester Brown, an  agricultural policy expert and founder of the Washington- based Earth Policy Institute. 'Farmland is better gold than gold for speculators,' Brown  told IPS. Growing concern over access to food is also creating a new  geopolitics around food security, with many countries buying  up farmland and banning the export of food, he said. World leaders have utterly failed to address the simple fact  that while there is enough food, a billion people, living in  every country in the world, simply can't afford to buy it,  said Anuradha Mittal of the Oakland Institute, a U. S. -based  policy think tank on social, economic and environmental  issues. 'Why were a billion hungry with a record wheat harvest in  2008?' Mittal told IPS. And how is it there are one billion people who are  overweight, with 300 million of those considered medically  obese?The global food system is designed to generate profits not  feed people, and nothing has changed since 2008, she said.   'There has been no focus on how to achieve food security or  on regulating the food trade,' Mittal noted. Instead, the World Bank, World Trade Organisation and other  multilateral organisations are pushing for more production  and more trade liberalisation, she said.  That approach is  exactly how Africa became unable to feed itself after being  previously food secure. 'Africans have become share-croppers, exporting coffee,  cotton, flowers and now food while going hungry,' Mittal  said. Under the guise of investing in agriculture, huge amounts of  money are being offered to debt-ridden countries in exchange  for long-term leases to their foodlands.  'Our research shows  that the most fertile lands are being secured.  There are  huge issues around governance and corruption in this land  grabbing,' said Mittal. More than 100 billion dollars has been invested in buying  farmland since 2008, mainly in Africa by foreign companies  and foreign-state owned industries, according to GRAIN, a  small international non-profit organisation that works to  support small farmers. This massive investment hasn't yet translated into more food  availability, says Lester Brown.  Often times, buying land is  just the first step.  Major investments are also needed in  farming infrastructure like roads, vehicles, storage  capacity, mechanical services for equipment, irrigation and  so on. 'I haven't seen a big increase in grain production anywhere.   Right now it looks like a lot of land speculation,' he said. Brown has long documented the fact that yields of rice,  wheat and other grains have not been increasing in many  countries while demand has escalated.  China, he notes, now  imports 70 percent of its soy and is expected to begin to  use its plentiful cash reserves to buy large quantities of  wheat and corn in the near future. And with the U. S.  converting 30 percent of its corn crop  into ethanol to 'feed' its cars and trucks, food supplies  will be tight for some years, he predicts. With the decline in traditional equity stocks along with  collapse of housing and commercial real estate markets,  billions of investment dollars are being mobilised to buy  farmland and food commodities.  It's not just Wall Street  looking for big returns, it's also private and public  pension funds in Europe and North America as well, said  Devlin Kuyek of GRAIN. Investors from Saudi Arabia have leased large tracts in land  in Ethiopia, Senegal, Mali and other African countries  amounting to several hundred thousand hectares.  'How can  African countries hope to have food security by signing  long-term leases to foreign interests?' Kuyek told IPS. When South Korea's Daewoo Logistics tried to buy 1. 3 million  hectares, or one-third, of Madagascar's farmland in 2008,  violent protests erupted and the government was toppled.   South Korea still has at least a million hectares in long- term leases elsewhere and China 2. 1 million ha, mainly in  Southeast Asia. Some of the leases are for 99 years at a one dollar a  hectare, but local people 'are not eligible for the deals  being promoted in countries where millions of people remain  dependent on food aid', said Howard Buffett, a U. S.  farmer  and philanthropist whose father is Warren Buffett, the well- known billionaire investor. Howard Buffet reports being offered land deals where African  governments promise to provide 70 percent of the financing,  all utilities, and a 98-year lease requiring no payments for  four years. The last thing Africa needs are policies that 'enable  foreign investors to grow and export food for their own  people to the detriment of the local population' writes  Buffet in the introduction to the 2010 Oakland Institute  report, '(Mis)investment in Agriculture'. Buffet's foundation has a research farm in South Africa and  says investments are needed, but in terms of seeds, inputs,  improved extension services, education on conservation  techniques and generally assisting local farmers.  Investing  in land grabs will simply fuel conflict over land and water,  he concluded. Shockingly, about 70 percent of the billion hungry people in  the world are farmers, herders and other food producers who  could feed themselves if they had access to land, markets  and a little bit of credit, said GRAIN's Kuyek. 'That well-understood reality has been ignored for years,'  he said.  'These land grabs are just wrong: morally and  socially wrong. '