In an emotionally charged meeting this week sponsored by the  National Commission on the BP Deepwater Horizon Oil Spill,  fishermen, Gulf residents and community leaders vented their  increasingly grave concerns about the widespread health issues  brought on by the three-month-long disaster. 'Today I'm talking to you about my life,' Cherri Foytlin  told the two commissioners present at the Jan.  12 meeting.   'My ethylbenzene levels are 2. 5 times the 95th percentile,  and there's a very good chance now that I won't get to see  my grandbabies…What I'm asking you to do now, if possible,  is to amend [your report].  Because we have got to get some  health care. 'Ethylbenzene is a form of benzene present in the body when  it begins to break down.  It is also present in BP's crude  oil. 'I have seen small children with lesions all over their  bodies,' Foytlin, co-founder of Gulf Change, a community  organisation based in Grand Isle, Louisiana, continued. 'We are very, very ill.  And dead is dead.  So it really  doesn't matter if the media comes back… or the president  hears us, or… if the oil workers and the fishermen and the  crabbers get to feed their babies and maybe have a good  Christmas next year… Dead is dead…I know your job is  probably already done, but I'd like to hire you if you don't  mind.  And God knows I can't pay you.  But I need your heart.   And I need your voice. 'Commissioner Frances Beinecke, president of the National  Resources Defence Council, vowed to convey her concerns to  the White House. 'We hear what you are saying,' said Beinecke.  'We will take  these health issues and concerns back to the president. 'The commission, appointed by President Barack Obama,  released its final report this week after a six-month  investigation into the nation's worst-ever oil disaster. The report recommended a massive overhaul of the oil  industry's failed safety practices in the Gulf, as well as  the creation of a new independent agency to monitor offshore  drilling activity. However, most of the 250 people at the meeting here focused  on the health crisis that has exploded in the wake of the  April 2010 disaster, leaving former BP clean-up workers and  Gulf residents alike suffering from ailments they attribute  to chemicals in BP's oil and the toxic dispersants used to  sink it. Dr.  Rodney Soto, a medical doctor in Santa Rosa Beach,  Florida, has been testing and treating patients with high  levels of oil-related chemicals in their bloodstream.  These are commonly referred to as volatile organic compounds  (VOCs).  Anthropogenic VOCs from BP's oil disaster are toxic  and have negative chronic health effects. Dr.  Soto is finding disconcertingly consistent and high  levels of toxic chemicals in every one of the patients he is  testing. 'I'm regularly finding between five and seven VOCs in my  patients,' Dr.  Soto told IPS.  'These patients include people  not directly involved in the oil clean-up, as well as  residents that do not live right on the coast.  These are  clearly related to the oil disaster. 'Nevertheless, U. S.  government agencies like the  Environmental Protection Agency, Food and Drug  Administration, and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric  Administration, along with President Obama himself, have  declared the Gulf of Mexico, its waters, beaches, and  seafood, safe and open to the public. Gulf residents at the meeting on Wednesday made sure the two  commissioners were aware of the health crisis they are  facing. Tom Costanza of Catholic Charities in the New Orleans area  stated that the region is in the middle of a social service  crisis and faced a claims process he said is fraught with  problems.  'People call me crying and dying,' he said.  'They need  medical attention and support to get through this. 'Ada McMahon works with Bridge the Gulf Project, a citizen  journalism website that highlights stories from Gulf Coast  communities about justice and sustainability.  She told IPS  that 'the unmet health issues are the biggest issue, along  with residents turned advocates going to meetings of the  commission or with [BP oil spill fund administrator Kenneth]  Feinberg to tell people about their health problems. ''People who can afford the 300-dollar blood tests have found  alarming rates of chemicals in their bodies, and these  people are concerned and doing what they can to speak out,'  she said.  'But they feel they can't wait for Congress or  Obama to address this, because they need doctors and support  now in the communities. 'LaTosha Brown, director of the Gulf Coast Fund for Community  Renewal and Ecological Health, which works with 250  community groups, agreed that 'the key concern expressed by  the community in response to the report is the overwhelming  need for access to health care. ''Over and over, people exposed to crude and dispersants from  the drilling disaster told stories of serious health issues  - from high levels of ethylbenzyne in their blood, to  respiratory ailments and internal bleeding - and expressed  an urgent need for access to doctors who have experience  treating chemical exposure,' she said. Stephen Bradberry, executive director of the Alliance  Institute, a non-profit that provides community organising  support in the Gulf South, worries that the Gulf Coast  Claims Facility is not accepting health claims, thus leaving  sick residents unable to work and without any income to pay  their medical bills.  'There is bruising and skin lesions, not just with clean-up  workers, these are residents not involved in the clean-up,'  Bradberry told IPS.  'Just yesterday I learned of five people  on Grand Isle who passed away…people who did not have health  problems prior to this.  Nevertheless, there has not been any  talk of monitoring of these communities. ' Bradberry, who also attended the forum on Wednesday, also  said, 'We need a separate health task force that can focus  solely on testing, monitoring, and studying the long-term  health issues from exposure to crude and dispersants.  And  this needs to happen now. '