Living up to its reputation - or notoriety - as one of the  world's quintessential talking shops, the United Nations has  scheduled a slew of high-level meetings and international  conferences through December this year. The meetings, which cover mostly social, economic and  environmental issues on the U. N.  agenda, also provide a  platform for world leaders to do their grandstanding on  political issues such as human rights and racism. The three high-level meetings on the U. N.  calendar for 2011  include: HIV/AIDS (Jun.  8-10); commemoration of the 10th  anniversary of the 2001 Durban Declaration on racism (Sep.   14); and the prevention and control of non-communicable  diseases (Sep.  19-20). The first major talk fest will be the Fourth U. N.  Conference  on Least Developed Countries (LDCs) being hosted by Turkey  and scheduled to take place May 9-13 in Istanbul. In October and November there will be two major summit  meetings: the South Summit (of the Group of 77 developing  nations) in Tripoli, Libya towards the end of October, which  will be immediately followed by the sixth annual G20 summit  - a non U. N.  event - in Cannes, France Nov.  3-4. The conventional wisdom, according to Secretary-General Ban  Ki-moon, is that the United Nations should 'cede  responsibility to the G20' on issues such as climate change  and poverty. 'But the G20, by itself, is not the answer,' he declared  last month, pointing out that G20 leaders need to work  closely with the United Nations. The last of the U. N.  meetings will be the Conference of  Parties (COP-17) on climate change due to take place in  South Africa Nov.  28-Dec.  9. There will also be a series of preparatory meetings this  year leading up to the Rio-plus-20 international conference  on the environment in 2012. Described as a follow-up to the 1992 Earth Summit in Rio and  the 2002 World Summit for Sustainable Development in  Johannesburg, South Africa, the 2012 conference will also  take place in Rio. Addressing the General Assembly Friday, and laying out his  priorities for 2011, the secretary-general told delegates  the overriding goal this year is to build on progress  already made that places a premium on the global legitimacy  and pulling power of the United Nations. 'Last year, we put forward an ambitious action plan to fight  poverty and advance the Millennium Development Goals  (MDGs),' he said. During the year ahead, the United Nations plans to emphasise  sustainable development as it works towards Rio+20. 'We will also give special focus to the needs of the most  vulnerable, wherever they may be,' Ban said. He described the upcoming U. N.  conference on LDCs as 'an  important occasion to recommit ourselves to these issues'. 'We have a big opportunity to advance on climate change, as  well.  Over the past few years, we raised the issue to the  top of the global agenda,' Ban said. He said there was 'progress' at the last climate change  talks in Cancun, Mexico in December, and every indication of  further progress in the run-up to COP17 in South Africa.   'Our challenge is to keep up the momentum,' he said. A major political turning point this year is the creation of  a major new agency - U. N.  Women - which began functioning  last week. Ban said 2011 will be the year to build U. N.  Women into all  that it should be: a fully integrated, fully operational and  fully funded dynamic force for change and women's  empowerment worldwide.  During the last four years of his tenure as secretary- general, Ban claimed the appointment of the largest number  of women to high ranking positions in the U. N.  system. He said he has appointed 'more women senior advisors than  any time in the history of the United Nations'. 'I have increased by 40 percent of senior women advisors,  above the rank of Assistant Secretary-General and Under- Secretary-General.  I will focus more now in strengthening  the mid-career women's leadership,' he declared. Besides advancing action on sustainable development, climate  change and gender empowerment, his other priorities for 2011  include promoting a safer and more secure world; human  rights and accountability; improving the U. N.  response to  major humanitarian crises; and strengthening the United  Nations from within. 'If 2010 was a challenging year for the United Nations, 2011  will be even more so,' Ban declared. 