As the impact of climate change worsens around the globe, a disaster-resilient  village is poised to be a solution for urban poor battling the constant floods and  typhoons that hit the Philippines. The concept village, submitted by Johanna Ferrer Guldager of Denmark, is  designed around elevated housing clusters.  Each house employs green  building technologies, such as the use of sustainable materials like bamboo  for the floors, walls and roof.  Roofs are used as a rainwater collection system  leading to a water conservation tank, while small gardens between houses  ensure food production even in times of disaster. The concept won the global architectural design competition dubbed Design  Against the Elements (DAtE), which aims to build the first green, liveable,  affordable and disaster-resilient village in the country. A panel of international and local jurors picked the winning architectural  design from among 119 entries submitted by professionals and students from  30 countries. 'We were very impressed with the different ideas from all over the world,'  architect Eleena Jamil of Malaysia, who served as one of the jurors, told IPS. Jamil, who designed a school made of bamboo that won the Millennium  School Design Competition for disaster-resilient schools organised in 2008,  said that the winner was chosen because of its sustainability and practicality. 'The ideas in the winning design are very easy to implement but it considers  a holistic approach.  It considers the way people interact within the  community and how they could grow their own food,' she said. Criteria for the judging of entries factored in disaster-resiliency, innovative  construction technology, socio-economic sustainability, cost-effectiveness  and adaptability to other sites.  Since the village will actually be a resettlement  site for marginalised families, the design also needed to be practical to build. Another design that allows houses to float by Dao Thanh Hai of Vietnam won  in the student category of the competition.  The design envisions a two- layered house, the core made of bamboo and wood set on floats and enclosed  inside a wind and storm-proof frame made of ecobags, ecobeams and  concrete frames.  This ensures that the house inside floats up as floods rise  while preventing the structure from being swept away. 'There were some very exciting ideas in the student category especially the  idea of a floating house and the use of sandbags.  It’s actually a house that  you can repeat everywhere, so that’s very good,' Jamil told IPS. According to DAtE, approximately 44 percent of the country’s population lives  in informal squatter settlements which offer no shelter from possible climate  disasters.  In Quezon City alone, the largest city in Metro Manila, as many as  26,974 families live in what are considered danger zones, according to the  Urban Poor Affairs Office. Houses of informal settlers hang precariously along the backs of creeks and  waterways, near or under power transmission lines, along sidewalks and on  dumpsites, making them the hardest hit when disaster strikes. 'Sustainable housing and environmentally safe villages should not only be the  privilege of the well-to-do, but should be accessible also to the poor who are  physically the most vulnerable to disasters,' said Quezon City Mayor Herbert  Bautista. The local government has promised to build the pilot village to be called the  House of San Miguel, after corporate sponsor San Miguel Corporation - which  co-funded the competition - to accommodate roughly 500 families.  'We hope  to build this as soon as possible.  We will be prioritising the poor who are most  vulnerable to climate change,' the mayor told media on the sidelines of the  opening ceremonies. Bautista stressed the importance of preparing for disasters especially with the  ill effects of climate change being seen around the world. This week, the strongest La Niña weather system in 50 years brought  devastating rains and flash floods and is battering Australia and mountain  towns near Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.  Meanwhile, a drought in Argentina is putting  agricultural production at risk. Illac Diaz, the founder and executive director of non-profit group My Shelter  Foundation, which spearheaded the competition, says that the goal of the  contest was to plan homes and communities that could survive for weeks in  the severely restricted conditions of a post-disaster situation. 'Rather than spend millions on expendable handouts after disaster strikes, we  wanted to work on something concrete ahead of time,' said Diaz during the  opening ceremonies ahead of the announcement of winners. 'We don’t want to just keep on implementing whatever design that has been  used before,' Diaz told IPS.  'Now through this contest, we have designs that  hopefully will change the concept of low-income housing. 'The Philippines ranks as one of the ten most afflicted countries in the world  in terms of lives and property lost due to climate change.  In September 2009,  Typhoon Ketsana dumped an average rainfall of an entire month in only six  hours and cost 240 million dollars in damages. On average, the country is battered by 20 typhoons every year, and stronger  typhoons as well as droughts are on the rise.  As part of the Pacific typhoon  belt, more than 7,000 islands that make up the country are susceptible to sea  level rise and storm surges with extreme changes in temperature. Green building trends seen in the exhibited designs include roof and pocket  areas for urban farming, use of solar panels, maximising natural light  sources, rainwater filtration systems, and gray water recycling. All the entries will be compiled in an encyclopaedia of architectural and  planning solutions to address climate change and will be made available to  designers and researchers worldwide. 'The future of the Philippines will be climate-challenged and we need change  to happen now,' says Diaz.   