Winter in the Indian capital is a season of mists, minus the mellow fruitfulness.   The air becomes charged with toxic emissions and particles that cannot disperse  due to a meteorological phenomenon called 'atmospheric inversion'. According to B. P.  Yadav, scientist with the meteorological department,  atmospheric inversion is caused by a warming of the upper layers of the  atmosphere, trapping colder air on the surface and, with it, vehicular and  industrial emissions. 'The immediate result of the phenomenon is severely reduced visibility that  throws flight schedules out of gear, as also the movement of trains and road  vehicles,' Yadav said.  'The phenomenon should not be mistaken for plain fog  which forms with plain moisture and high humidity. ' Atmospheric inversion also causes severe health problems.  'There is a marked  rise in respiratory ailments in the winter months due to smog and it can also  aggravate heart problems,' says K. K.  Aggarwal, a leading cardiologist in this  city of 15 million people.     'Delhi’s air in winter is a toxic cocktail but the worst ingredient, from the  point of view of health, is respirable suspended particulate matter which can  enter the bloodstream through the lungs after inhalation, in much the same  way as cigarette smoke,' Aggarwal said.  Aggarwal, a noted champion of public health issues, said people have  forgotten the killer 'London Fog' which claimed some 5,000 lives in 1952.  'Many industrial countries had since that tragedy adopted ambient air quality  standards to protect the public from such pollutants as sulphur and nitrogen  oxides, suspended particulate matter and carbon monoxide released by  burning fossil fuels.  India, sadly, does not enforce these norms,' Aggarwal  said.    Studies conducted last year by the Indian Institute of Technology, Delhi,  showed that pollutants from the transport and industry sectors react with  moisture under low temperature conditions to produce the thick fog that  shrouds the city between November and January.  'The problem is worsening each year and threatens to overtake gains from a  Supreme Court order ten years ago which ordered all diesel-run buses and  taxis off the streets of Delhi and replaced them with fleets running on   compressed natural gas (CNG),' says Anumita Roy Choudhury, a director at  the Centre for Science and Environment, a leading non-government  organisation.    'Second-generation reforms will need to seriously scale up public transport  and reduce traffic volumes,' Choudhury said. Citing official disease statistics, Choudhury said acute respiratory diseases  reported in the city went up by 28 percent between 2005 and 2008.  'The  government will need to take really strong measures to address air pollution. '  ‘Role of Meteorology on Urban Air Pollution Dispersion’, a scientific   analysis  for a 20-year period up to 2008 found that concentrations of pollutants were  40 - 80 percent higher during the winter months when compared to the  annual average for the period.   Sarath Guttikunda who led the study said that while interventions like  changing the entire bus fleet and introduction of a metro rail system were  helpful, more industries needed to be shut down or relocated to meet  acceptable clean air standards.  However, such drastic steps may be hard to carry out given the various  industrial lobbies at play.  For example, diesel engine manufacturers have not  given up trying to re-enter Delhi’s vast automobile market by discrediting  CNG.  A study released last month by the Central Pollution Control Board entitled  ‘Study of the Exhaust Gases from different fuel based vehicles for Carbonyls  and Methane Emissions’ describes CNG as the 'worst' fuel and openly  supports the use of diesel.    'The design, scope and conclusion of the study have raised many doubts  about the objective of the study,' said Choudhury.  'The study has become a  pawn in the hands of diesel business that is out to use it to discredit CNG.  No  study in the world has ever said that CNG is dirtier than diesel. 'As for relocating industries, the Delhi state government has embarked upon a  controversial programme of building 'waste-to-energy' plants, through  private public partnerships, on the plea that they will produce electricity from  rubbish-derived fuels. CPCB member secretary B.  Sen Gupta said the plants were, in fact, being set  up in violation of Supreme Court orders that require all such incinerators to  be located far away from residential areas.  'What we need is scientific management of waste, starting with proper  collection and segregation, rather than indiscriminate incineration,' Sen Gupta  said.  'Incineration plants have been a failure in India and plant owners get  funds and subsides form the government which are misused. ' 'These so-called waste-to-energy plants use discredited technology that will  only contribute to the load of RSPM and other toxic emissions in Delhi’s air,'  said Gopal Krishna, convenor of Toxic Watch, a major NGO.  'Anyone can see  that these plants can only worsen Delhi’s dangerous winter smog. '  