Weather experts warned Sri Lankan to be prepared for extreme weather changes  with hardly any notice following devastating floods here that have affected over  one million people. 'Global weather patterns are changing, we should be prepared for extreme  changes,' Gunavi Samarasinghe, the head of Meteorological Department, said  as the country battled floods in the east as temperatures island-wide  dropped to sixty year lows. The drop in temperature was caused by the cloud cover over the island,  Samarasinghe said.  Colombo registered a temperature of 18. 8C, while the  central Nuwera Eliya highlands fell to a single digit - 7C. Samarasinghe said that the island was facing the La Nina phenomenon during  which temperatures near the Equator have dropped by as much as 5C.  'We  better be ready to face any kind of weather,' he said. According to reports on Jan.  14, the two-plus weeks of flooding had killed 27  and left 12 missing.  The Disaster Management Centre, the government body  coordinating the flood relief effort said that over 18,000 houses, 200 small  and large reservoirs and parts of 152 major and minor roads were in need of  repair after the floods. Samarasinghe’s assessment that extreme weather patterns were becoming  common is substantiated by the growing frequency of flash flooding on the  island. Since May of 2010, the island has been ravaged by flash flooding on three  occasions - marooning a total of 2. 2 million persons.  The largest and worst  being the latest.  In May 2010, over 675,000 were affected by flash floods in  the western and southern regions, including the capital Colombo.  Parts of the  same area went under water in November leaving around 375,000 marooned. By far the latest flooding has been most destructive, said Samarasinghe,  claiming its aftermath was only second to the 2004 Asian tsunami. The U. N. ’s Global Disaster Alert and Coordination System rated it as an  extreme event that is not likely to reoccur in another 100 years.  Heavy rains  between Dec.  26 and Jan.  11, caused havoc.  Large reservoirs in Sri Lanka’s  northern and central regions quickly reached spill levels and sluice gates were  opened by the irrigation engineers to prevent the banks from bursting. 'This is monumental,' said Upul Tammitta, an aide to Agrarian Minister S.  M.   Chandrasena, after he witnessed the sluice gates of the Nuwera Weva tank, a  large reservoir in the north central Anuradhapura town being released.  'I have  never seen anything like this before. 'He said that the when the water was released, some of it flowed on land  where buildings had been built.  'It looked like the tanks natural water flow  had been blocked, at least when it reached spill levels. 'This time the rains were so heavy - Batticaloa, an eastern town, received over  300 millimetres in one day, the highest in over 100 years - that with or  without human interference the floods would have come. Experts contend that at least some of the damage, especially in urban areas,  could be mitigated if people paid attention to where and how they were  building. Most of the flash floods that the capital Colombo has experienced in the last  six months have been blamed on human interference.  Experts contend that  blocked drainage networks as well as filled marsh land left rainwater with  nowhere to flow, especially when the rains are extremely heavy. 'We have to seriously think about not blocking these networks, otherwise the  rainwater has nowhere to go,' Ananda Mallawatantri, assistant resident  representative of the U. N.  Development Programme (UNDP) warned when  Colombo went under. The UNDP has financed a 150,000-dollar clean up project that has cleared  some of the water and drainage networks in the capital and suburbs that  helped ease water flow.  Soon after the November floods the government  decided to widen several water tanks in areas closer to Colombo in an effort  to mitigate future flooding.  During heavy rains in mid-November some parts  of the capital became virtually impassable with floodwaters clogging  intersections and prompting massive traffic jams.  Engineers at the Irrigation Department have also proposed to widen or  excavate water retention basins on higher ground, in an effort to slow down  and control cascading flash floods following heavy rains.  That plan is yet to be  implemented.  Even in rural areas construction and farmland continue to  encroach into riverbeds. The recurring floods have left steep recovery and assistance bills.  In 2010 the  government spent over 100 million rupees (over 1 million dollars) as  assistance and for relief efforts during the floods. The latest flooding is likely to add to the burden.  The government had  allocated over 200 million rupees for immediate assistance, but the long- term requirements appear to be higher given the scope of the devastation. A rough estimate said that the damages from the latest floods would cost  over 30 billion rupees. As the enormity of the flooding became clear, the government made an  official request to the UN for assistance.  The World Food Programme (WFP)  pledged food aid for 400,000 affected people worth 55 million rupees.  The  U. N.  was expected to make a flash appeal to donors to secure funding for the  flood relief - it said that funding was dangerously low and the WFP warned of  relief drying out if immediate funding was )not received. 'We are discussing with the government on the extent of the damages.  There  will be medium and long-term impacts from the latest flooding.  We have to  be prepared for that,' Barbara Manzi, the head of the U. N.  Office for the  Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) in Colombo said. Chandrasena estimated that over 400,000 acres of paddy land was badly  damaged by the recent floods.  Two large paddy production bases, the  Polonnaruwa and Ampara Districts were rendered almost impassable for at  least two days at the height of the flooding.  Vegetable prices are also spiking  following the flooding.  