While floods and droughts are often highlighted in the media for devastating the  world’s rice production, a lesser-known culprit has been able to scurry away  without being fingered for causing damage - rats. The rodents reportedly devour 'millions of tons of rice each year' in pre- harvest losses across Asia. 'Rats are the number one pre-harvest pests of rice in Indonesia and the third  most important pest in Vietnam rice fields,' Grant Singleton, a rodent expert  at the Manila-based International Rice Research Institute (IRRI), told IPS. With an eye toward saving more rice for the hungry in the region,  international researchers are training farmers in Indonesia, the Philippines  and Vietnam to combat this regular destroyer of the grain.  Agriculture experts  are viewing the eco-friendly rodent management message now taking root in  the smallholder paddy fields in Southeast Asia as an efficient and safe  alternative to the previously common use of toxic chemicals, such as  rodenticides. 'This is the first time that ecologically-based rodent management has been  promoted since the introduction of chemicals to kill rodents in the 1950s,'  said Singleton.  'We now have a good understanding of when, where and how  to conduct control of the main rodent species in two of the region’s largest  rice producers. Close to 200,000 rice farmers in Indonesia and Vietnam are part of an on- going campaign to arm farmers with environmentally friendly methods to save  their crop from the rodents. According to IRRI, pre-harvest losses of Asia’s staple have ranged from five  percent of the grain in Malaysia to as much as 17 percent in Indonesia.  A loss  of six percent in Asia 'amounts to enough rice to feed 225 million people -  roughly the population of Indonesia - for 12 months,' it adds. The drive to combat the rodents comes in the wake of a challenge faced by  agriculture research centres in the region to produce sufficient grain to feed  the nearly 570 million people who are undernourished in the Asia-Pacific  region. Asia accounts for 90 percent of the rice produced globally, which topped  679. 9 million tonnes for the year in un-milled paddy, according to recent  U. N.  figures. The region’s major rice producers - home to the 250 million rice farms across  the continent - are China, India, Indonesia, Pakistan, Bangladesh, Vietnam,  Thailand, the Philippines and Burma (or Myanmar). The new IRRI-led effort, places greater emphasis on community cooperation  and management - including the simple message that farmers plant their  crops within two weeks of each other - is already winning praise among  farmers who have embraced this green solution. 'I now know how to manage rats better, working with my community so there  are fewer in our fields and the rat damage is less,' says Esmeraldo Joson Jr, a  Filipino farmer, following his shift away from rodenticides, in an IRRI media  release. This is not the only attempt in the region to stop rats from depriving people  from their staple diet. The U. N.  Food and Agriculture Organisation (FAO) has been helping farming  communities in East Timor and Cambodia to save their harvested rice by  storing it in small metal silos, considered more reliable and rat-proof than the  traditional baskets and clay pots farmers have used for ages. 'These are small weapons against post-harvest losses,' says Rosa Rolle,  senior agro-industry and post harvest officer at the FAO’s Asia-Pacific  regional office in Bangkok.  'They offer long term solutions and are not costly  to protect rice against rats and mice. 'The twin efforts to combat the trail of grain losses caused by rats have  gathered momentum following the global food crisis in 2008, when prices of  grain rose to alarming levels and triggered concerns about millions affected  by loss of staple meals. 'After the 2008 food crisis, saving rice from post-harvest losses are getting  increased attention from all the stakeholders,' says Subash Dasgupta, senior  plant production officer at the FAO’s regional office. Another spark to target rodents stemmed from the fears of famine that have  spread through parts of northeast India, Bangladesh, Burma and Laos since  the end of 2006, when a plague of rats ravaged rice in the fields and grains  that had been stored. 'The rats were terrible.  There was nothing the farmers could do,' says Cheery  Zahau, a human rights activist from Burma’s Chin ethnic minority who faced  the brunt of the devastation from late 2006 through 2008. Chin families normally eat two meals a day, but during the explosion of the  rat population, they were reduced to eating only one meal, she told IPS.  'The  health consequences of that food crisis were very serious. 'The explosion of the rat population was predicted though, coming once in  nearly 50 years, when a local bamboo species starts flowering.  The rats are  drawn to its fruit and then multiply rapidly due to a hormonal change after  eating the protein-rich fruits. The rats ravaged all the grain in their path, prompting some farmers in the  mountainous Chin State close to India and Bangladesh to stop growing rice in  2008.  'They felt it was futile,' says Cheery.  'They were defeated by the rats. '  