In China, a country with a history of famine and where rural dwellers still use the  greeting 'have you eaten?', food is close to sacred.  Feeding the country’s  massive population remains one of the biggest threats to future economic  growth and social stability, experts warn. Since 1997, China has lost some 8. 2 million hectares (20. 2 million acres) of  arable land to urbanization, industrialization, re-forestation and damage  caused by natural disasters.  Thirty-seven percent of China’s territory suffers  from land degradation and the country’s per capita available land is 40  percent of the world average. 'China has made remarkable economic and social progress over the past  three decades, lifting several hundred million out of poverty, and food security  has benefited significantly from this overall progress,' said Olivier De  Schutter, the United Nations Special Rapporteur on the Right to Food, when he  visited China in December.  'However, the shrinking of arable land and the massive land degradation  threatens the ability of the country to maintain current levels of agricultural  production, while the widening gap between rural and urban is an important  challenge to the right to food of the Chinese population. 'The right to food requires people to have incomes that allow them to  purchase food, and that food systems be sustainable enough that satisfying  current demands does not jeopardize future needs.  'It’s obvious that these two conditions are facing important challenges today,'  De Schutter said.  Recent food price increases may be a sign of things to come, the UN  Rapporteur added, urging China to make the shift to more sustainable types  of farming.  Without mitigating actions, including a shift to low carbon  agriculture, climate change will cause agricultural productivity to drop by five  to ten percent by 2030.  In 2010, China recorded its seventh consecutive record grain harvest with  production of 546 million tons, according to state media reports.  The  government has said current grain stocks exceed 200 million tons and that  grain self-sufficiency has stood at 95 percent for the last decade.  China has pledged to maintain a grain self-sufficiency level of more than 90  percent in the decade to come by developing agricultural technologies and  improving land use, He Bingsheng, president of China Agricultural University  and one of the country’s leading economists, told China Daily.   But He warned that shrinking farmland and an imbalanced use of land pose  challenges for the country’s grain producers.  'A certain amount of imports are necessary.  But for the whole country, food  security has to be ensured, because for a country as big as China the  international market falls far short of our demand,' He said. Li Guoxiang, a researcher at the Chinese Academy of Social Sciences’ Rural  Development Institute, says China’s food security remains stable for now.  Li says China has pursued a food security policy that is mostly autonomous,  with only a small percentage of agricultural products coming from abroad,  meaning China is only marginally affected by rising food prices worldwide.  'We’ve had record grain harvest for seven years in a row, with a growth rate of  3 percent in 2010,' Li tells IPS.  'Although international grain prices grew over  the past year, in general the grain price in China remained stable.  Most  people’s lives haven’t been impacted. 'Li admits that threats to China’s food security remain, including soil  degradation and desertification.  He notes that the government has taken  steps to tackle the issue, such as increasing the share of fixed capital  investment allotted to agricultural areas and increasing agricultural subsidies.   In 2010, the central government invested about RMB 800 billion (120 billion  dollars) on the agricultural sector, a number that is expected to reach 900  billion RMB this year.  But Li says the government still has much to do, including protecting  farmland and improving agricultural productivity and water infrastructure.  'Food is the most powerful political weapon,' Li says.  'There is no substitute  for food consumption.  No one can live without food, so food security is the  basis of national security.  A lack of food security will hinder social  development and trigger social unrest. 'Zhao Xiaofeng, a researcher at the China Rural Governance Research Centre  at Huazhong University of Science and Technology in Wuhan, Hubei province,  says drought — often the result of large-scale dam building — continues to be  a major threat to China’s food security. Places such as Henan province, one of the country’s core grain producing  regions, have been severely impacted by droughts, Zhao says, adding that the  government needs to improve water infrastructure around river ways and  reservoirs to protect nearby agricultural land.  Zhao tells IPS that China’s risk to food security will reach dangerous heights if  more than 10 percent of the food supply comes from imports.  It currently  stands at five percent.  'China is the most populous country in the world.  You can imagine what it  will be like if its people don’t have enough food. '  