For close to 10 years, Patrick Marzouca has just managed to  keep his tiny car factory afloat in a rapidly declining  productive sector. On Dec.  9, the Excel Motors chief watched as three Jamaican- made Island Cruisers were loaded onto a ship bound for the  Turks and Caicos Islands, the first shipment of a batch of  30 to be sold in that Caribbean territory. Built as a tour car, the development of the two-door Island  Cruiser has been hampered by double-digit interest rates,  Marzouca said.  In recent years, the businessman has seen his  factory staff reduced to one - just to maintain the  equipment.  It's a common situation in Jamaica's manufacturing sector.  A combination of government policy, high interest rates and  exorbitant energy and security costs has reduced the  sector's contribution to the island's Gross Domestic Product  (GDP) from 21. 3 percent in 1990, to 8. 3 percent in 2009. The sector now employs about 78,000 workers, down from  120,000 in 1990. For more than two years, the president of the Jamaica  Manufacturers Association (JMA), Omar Azan, has called for  single-digit interest rates as a way to spur the sector and  help ease Jamaica's dependence on raw goods exports and  tourism. In the past year, government has made 'low cost' funds  available and instigated a debt swap that reduced interest  rates on government paper from 18 to 12 percent. But Finance Minister Audley Shaw's debt refinancing did not  slash rates as expected.  Banks have been stubborn and almost  a year later, rates are only just creeping downward.  When added to the downturn in the world economy, a decrease  in domestic demand, unsold inventory and the high cost of  inputs, the manufacturing sector has been hit hard. The loss or reduction of export markets, including bauxite,  and the collapse of the local agricultural sector have also  taken their toll. Local raw material and demand dried up with the collapse of  dairy, beef and the food fish sub-sectors and the loss of  traditional banana and sugar markets.  Agro-processing and  the manufacture of animal feed, agricultural chemicals,  packaging, food products, milk and cheese, among other  products, also declined sharply, putting many out of  business.  Financial analyst Ralston Hyman believes government policy  is contributing the woes of the manufacturing sector.  He  pointed to the island's 33 percent corporate tax rate and  the high fuel prices, which he said, makes the cost of  production here well above those of other CARICOM (Caribbean  Community) countries.  There is consensus that Jamaica's current climate is  incapable of kick-starting manufacturing.  Analysts now seem  united in their call for an economic policy that will  stimulate growth, recently projected at one percent per year  but now revised downward. According to Hyman, many of the problems in the productive  sector are the result of 'flawed government policies'.  He  pointed to a Dec.  23 threat by Standard and Poor (S&P) to  lower Jamaica's credit rating from B- (B minus) unless  government implements 'a sustainable economic plan' for  reducing what S&P termed the 'onerous' debt burden. Marzouca is critical of the 'lack of government support' for  the productive sector, an observation that finds agreement  in the agricultural and agro-processing sectors. Peter McConnell, managing director of Trade Winds Citrus  Company, wants policies that allow local businesses to  operate on a 'level playing field'.  While he does not  support protection for inefficient producers, he noted that  local farmers, in particular, need the protection of strong  and effective policies if the country is expected to feed  itself. 'We need to look to the local market and the region and do  what we are good at to compete,' McConnell told IPS. Business is booming at McConnell's juice plant in Bog Walk,  a farming district about 26 miles outside the capital  Kingston.  Despite a decline in agriculture, Trade Winds is  churning out millions of gallons of fresh fruit juices each  week for an insatiable Jamaican and CARICOM market.  Trade Winds was born out of a dying sugar industry and is  bouncing back from near extinction by the Citrus Tristeza  virus, which forced the replanting of the company's 2,700  acres of citrus groves. The old sugar mill now houses an ultra modern processing  plant and cooling facility, and the rows of sugar cane have  given way to citrus trees.  The company uses all of its own  and provides a market for a variety of fruits from both  local and regional farmers.  But while Marzouca and McConnell have beaten the odds, both  admit that the current climate continues to be difficult.  In  addition to the other challenges, development and research  funding are almost non-existent.  Shaw is not immune to the problems and he has threatened to  forcibly lower interest rates 'if the banks didn't do it  themselves'.  The finance minister also announced that  government was reviewing measures to make banks more  competitive. Without giving details he said, 'There are several  initiatives that we are now considering to bring to Cabinet.   If accepted, and once implemented, they will encourage  greater competition among banks because it will involve  greater portability and mobility of loans. 'Analysts are already warning of dire consequences if the  government sets interest rates.  This could they say, could  impact future fundraising prospects of the government  overseas. 'There will be chaos in the banking sector and severe  dislocation in the capital markets,' Hyman cautioned, noting  that it would also mean setting the banks' labour and other  costs. 'The government must re-negotiate and extend the current IMF  loan,' he said, proposing among other things using the stock  exchange to divest government holdings, land reform, and  alternative energy policies aimed at reducing Jamaica's fuel  bill.  Azan wants government to pay equal attention to strengthen  tourism, agriculture and manufacturing.  The MAJ president  noted that given the interdependency of local industries, a  strong manufacturing sector would help to support recovery  when others were impacted. 