A Sri Lankan scientist is calling for the drafting of 'Millennium Consumption  Goals' to force rich countries to curb their climate-damaging consumption  habits, in the same way the poor have Millennium Development Goals to get  them out of poverty. Prof.  Mohan Munasinghe, expert on sustainable development and climate  change, says, 'We now have Millennium Development Goals (MDG) for the  poor.  We should extend that to the rich and make sure they consume more  sustainably. ' He said this is needed because 85 percent of all consumption in world is done  by the top 20 percent of the world’s rich.  'If they can be more sustainable in consumption, it can reduce the  environmental burden by a tremendous amount,' said Munasinghe in an  interview with IPS in Colombo, where he is based. Munasinghe is vice-chair of the Geneva-based Intergovernmental Panel on  Climate Change (IPCC), which shared the Nobel Peace Prize in 2007 with  former U. S.  Vice-President Al Gore.   He noted the severe changes in the weather pattern due to El Niño and La  Niña happening one after the other in December.  El Niño is a regional  phenomenon that heats up parts of the Pacific region, affects South America  and the rest of world, while La Niña, which also starts in the Pacific, sets off a  cold spell.   In Sri Lanka, recent flash floods and an extremely cold spell killed more than  40 people and affected over a million others.  Hundreds of acres of rice fields  and other crops were destroyed by raging floodwaters, resulting in high  prices of vegetables and other essentials. Munasinghe said his country’s main priority now is to reduce the vulnerability  of the poor to climate change impacts.  'Our carbon emissions are low,' Munasinghe said.  'While we may need to  reduce it in the future, that’s not the main issue.  Our main problem is  reducing vulnerability as it affects the poor most.  It is very unfair, because it  is the CO2 emissions of the rich countries which have caused the problem. 'Meteorologist Sarath Premadasa said what’s happening now in Sri Lanka and  the world is the growing intensity of extreme weather.  'If it’s a drought, it’s  worse than before, or rains are at a high intensity. 'Prof Champa Navaratne, Head of Agriculture Engineering at Sri Lanka’s  southern-based Ruhunu University, said the erratic weather patterns would  create serious food shortages and a food security problem this year.  'We do a lot of research to develop better cropping patterns for our farmers  based on the weather but this is near impossible now,' she said.  Sri Lanka has  two rice cropping seasons but in the past six months, she said farmers in the  southern district of Matara alone have had to sow the fields three times, and  not just once, because of erratic flash floods.  'We’ll have a food crisis in mid- 2011, that’s for sure,' she added. Some of the main areas of concern in Sri Lanka, Munasinghe said, are its  vulnerability to droughts and high temperatures in the dry zone, and the  impact on agriculture and rice where a drop of up to 20 percent in yields  could happen by 2050.  And then there are the floods and earth-slips in the wet zone due to  excessive rain, the sea level rising, and storms that would affect fisheries and  coastal dwellers.  Water-borne and mosquito-borne diseases, already  prevalent in the country due to unsustainable development, are likely to  worsen. 'We need to climate-proof Sri Lanka by making our development path more  sustainable,' he said. Last month, Munasinghe was one of three specialists who spoke on climate  change before a packed session of the United Nations in New York.  The two  others were Achim Steiner, Executive Director of United Nations  Environmental Programme, and Martin Koh, Executive Director of the South  Centre. Munasinghe has been advising not only governments but also multinational  corporations like Tesco and Unilever on sustainable development vis-à-vis  climate change.  Two days after the U. N.  session, Munasinghe briefed senior World Bank  officials at its headquarters in Washington on climate and development and  the need for an integrated approach to these issues.  Munasinghe was also in China in December for three separate high-level  meetings with government officials, civil society and business, with each  sector concerned about the environment and seeking to change the way  things are done.  