Since recovering part of their territory in 2005, an indigenous Guaraní  community in the northeastern Argentine province of Misiones is working to  maintain and expand a cultural tourism initiative. On about 265 hectares located a 20-minute drive from Iguazú Falls and 10  kilometres from the Argentine city of Puerto Iguazú, people in the Yryapú  community are learning computer skills and foreign languages, even as they  delve deeper into their own culture. The 75 families that live in the middle of a dense jungle coveted by tourism  companies have the support of the MATE Project (Argentine Model for  Tourism and Employment of Native Peoples), financed by the provincial  Misiones government and the Canada International Development Agency. The idea emerged in 2005 when representatives from Canada's Niagara  College contacted the Iguazú Technological Institute, a tourism and  hospitality school that forms part of MATE, and proposed to work together on  indigenous cultural tourism. The Guaraní Mbyá in the area only recently officially recovered part of their  territory.  Like other indigenous populations, they felt forced to abandon their  traditional way of life, which in the modern world could not ensure their  survival, and they were tempted to assimilate western customs and lifestyles.  The project for building appreciation of their own identity and culture reached  a high point in 2008, when MATE began the process towards autonomy,  which allowed it to build financial support from national and international  sources. That year the Canadian non-governmental organisation Friends of Yryapú was  created, and contributes financially to helping the indigenous landowners the  tools needed to move away from reliance on government and private aid.  Young people study ways to maintain their culture while adapting to the new  realities, which includes using computers.  'Today we don't live like we did in  the past,' Ricardo Fernández, 40, told Tierramérica.  He works as a bilingual  instructor in a local school and teaches students about their ancestral  customs. 'This is the only way that we are going to have the resources to work and to  maintain our family,' he said. Meanwhile, most get by with sales of traditional crafts: necklaces, bracelets,  rings, baskets and carved wooden figures.  Others work informally in nearby  towns and cities.   And many rely on government aid.  The Guaraní Mbyá are also subsistence farmers, growing millet, sweet potato,  cassava and pumpkin.  They raise pigs and chickens, while hunting is limited to  the occasional bird or small mammal.  The traditional style of housing, with a log structure, bamboo and mud walls,  and palm-leaf roofs -- also used in building religious structures -- has been  replaced by wood houses with metal or straw roofing. Few in this community have attended secondary school.  The city's schools  offer basic classes only through the seventh grade.  The MATE Project aims to  resolve this educational deficit. Francisco Medina has been studying computer science for four years, has two  children, and understands four languages: Guaraní (his native language),  Spanish, English and French.  His goal is to work as a tour guide. 'I have two hours of computing per day,' he told Tierramérica. Elvio Barreto, 32, is studying English, which has helped him understand some  of the foreign tourists to guide them along the paths through the jungle. At the Mbyá Guaraní Clemência González Intercultural Bilingual School, or  'School of the Jungle,' the indigenous peoples live their education by sharing  experiences with the instructors.  They study ideas of natural and cultural  heritage and learn from conferences and videos about the customs and  traditions of their people. The school already has 70 students, ages 13 to 38.  Along with the students  from Yryapú, there are young people from other Mbyá communities in  Misiones, as well as from Paraguay and Brazil. In addition to guided tours, visitors can buy handicrafts, as well as learn to  make them.  They can also take in the sounds of a children's choir and listen  to stories about the past of this once-powerful indigenous nation. The revenues from these activities go to a community fund that will help  sustain future enterprise as well as fund health and social services and  education. 'If it is not oriented to the indigenous peoples running their own business, it  is not the time to evaluate the project's economic results.  The number of  visitors is uncertain and a commercial organisation does not yet exist,' MATE  coordinator Claudio Salvador, a professor and writer, told Tierramérica. That is a long-term effort.  'Our job is to educate for employment through the  intercultural method that we create, whose impact we most hope for is to  improve quality of life,' he said. The journey through the Yryapú community begins at the fourth kilometre of  Highway 12, in Puerto Iguazú.  But it persists in the memory, leaving a  sensation of having seen a part of history that is not written in textbooks. In Misiones, there are 100 Guaraní communities of the Mbyá and Ava katú eté  groups.  Of those, just 25 hold title to their land.  Many indigenous peoples live  in poverty and rely on government assistance. The situation is not much different in other South American countries.  An  estimated 300,000 Guaraní are distributed across the territories of Brazil,  Paraguay, Uruguay, Argentina and Bolivia. Of that total, the branch of Mbyá peoples totals 11,000 to 13,000 people in  Brazil, Paraguay and Argentina.  The largest group is concentrated in the  region of Chaco, according to Egon Dionísio Heck, coordinator of the  Indigenous Missionary Council (CIMI) in the Brazilian state of Mato Grosso do  Sul. Alongside other entities working with the Guaraní, CIMI is drawing up a map  of the communities and the extension of their territories, updating  demographic and environmental data, to be ready by the end of 2011. 'Despite the efforts of some (South American) presidents committed to  regularise land titles, the force of agri-business prevails,' Heck told  Tierramérica. There is strong growth of the paper industry in Misiones, with the expansion  of pine and eucalyptus plantations into the jungle areas home to indigenous  peoples, said Heck. (*This story was originally published by Latin American newspapers that are  part of the Tierramérica network.  Tierramérica is a specialised news service  produced by IPS with the backing of the United Nations Development  Programme, United Nations Environment Programme and the World Bank. ) 