Earlier this month, on a hot and humid day in the Jambi  province of Indonesia, a group of local farmers was critically  injured after being shot as they attempted to harvest fruit on  a contested palm plantation. The shooting, allegedly carried out by the national police's  notorious Mobile Brigade (Brimob), followed a four-year-long  conflict between the villagers of Karang Mendapo and an  Indonesian palm oil company, involving local land rights. While this violent attack caused outcry and protests  locally, Jambi's is not an isolated case. As climate change fears lead to a rise in carbon trading,  and industries such as palm oil and biofuel prosper,  indigenous peoples worldwide are increasingly being forced  to fight against land grabs from both big business and their  own governments. 'I don't know how forest communities will benefit from  climate change,' said Ghan Shyam Pandey, a forest  conservationist and management specialist from the Ashwara  community in Nepal. 'It seems with negotiations going on around the world it may  not benefit the communities who have worked in forests in  the past,' he said. Pandey is the coordinator of the Global Alliance of  Community Forestry (GACF) and is currently in New York for  the ninth session of the biennial United Nations Forum on  Forests (UNFF9). The forum, which officially launches the International Year  of the Forests, follows the REDD+ agreement negotiated in  Cancún last December, which saw the global community lay out  objectives for reducing emissions from deforestation and  forest degradation. Although Pandey welcomes agreements such as REDD+ as tools  to advance conservation, he underscored the need for  universal pacts to consider the livelihoods of indigenous  communities. 'Forests are not only about biodiversity and climate change  and carbon, but also other things,' he told IPS. 'Those people who live in and around the forest depend on  the forest.  If this is realised by governments — that we are  responsible to both people and forests — if they can make  good policies for both the forests and people to make their  livelihoods better, and eradicate poverty, that will really  bring new things,' Pandey said. It is a sentiment echoed in a report released this week by  the International Union of Forest Research Organisations  (IUFRO), highlighting the need for people to be put back at  the centre of forest management. And it's the theme of this year's UNFF9, which has called  for the international community to respond to global warming  with 'people-friendly' conservation solutions.  According to the Food and Agriculture Organisation (FAO), at  least 1. 6 billion people depend on forests globally, and  approximately 60 million are employed by forest-based  industries. While forests cover about 31 percent of the world's land  area, amounting to just under four billion hectares, 13  million hectares have been lost due to its conversion to  other uses. Many forest areas have been traditionally managed by local  communities.  However, with the increasing popularity of  carbon storage and biofuels, there is fresh interest in  these previously 'unprofitable' land tracts. According to Jeremy Rayner, one of the authors of the IUFRO  report, indigenous people are losing their customary land  rights as governments and businesses rush to secure control  over forests worldwide.  'We know, of course, from bitter experience that turning  forests into protected areas that exclude local communities  is a losing proposition,' Rayner, a professor at University  of Saskatchewan Graduate School of Public Policy, told IPS. 'It's simply impossible to enforce — and it puts a great  deal of pressure on other forest areas,' he said. Rayner said the REDD+ agreement was a step forward in terms  of forest conservation.  However, he argues that 'one-size- fits-all' international pacts needed to focus more on  supporting individual regional initiatives. Washington-based conservationist Andy White, coordinator of  the Rights and Resources Initiative, agrees. White told IPS the past 12 months had seen major progress in  countries such as Brazil, the Philippines and Mexico in  respect to indigenous land rights, but other areas of the  globe including Indonesia were lagging behind. 'I hope that governments are not coming to New York with  plans to celebrate,' White said, in reference to the UNFF9. 'There has been shockingly little progress since the first  global forestry congress dedicated to 'people and forests'  in Jakarta in 1978.  If governments had taken their  agreements there seriously, to put people at the centre of  forestry, then Indonesia would now be the centre of global  forest conservation, not leading the world in  deforestation,' he added. 'Governments still claim ownership over a majority of the  forests across the world despite historic ownership by local  peoples, despite clear evidence that indigenous peoples and  forest communities do a better job at conservation than  governments, and despite the fact that government-promoted  forest industries have led to corruption and continued  exclusion of local people, extensive abuses of women and  children and entrenched poverty. 'White argues that until pressures stemming from booming food  prices, agriculture and biofuels were managed effectively  and rights for local peoples were respected, violent clashes  such as the recent incident in Jambi province were likely to  increase. 'When we look back at 2010 we see it was a year of  substantial pushback from local communities,' he noted.  'On  one hand, it's good that communities are increasingly able  to speak out, but what we will see now is the real contest,  and we're likely to see more conflict in the future for it. '