France’s high tariffs for solar-generated electricity have led to an investment  boom in photovoltaic panels, but now the government is rowing back, much to  the chagrin of environmentalists. Last month, France imposed a three-month freeze on new solar projects  while the government holds deliberations and draws up new rules scheduled  to be announced in March. 'The suspension is regrettable, but there has been too much speculation,'  France's new Ecology, Transport and Housing Minister Nathalie Kosciusko- Morizet told IPS this week. Before the freeze, France had seen something of a 'solar rush' in photovoltaic  panel installations because the country had the highest payments in Europe  for solar-generated electricity that was fed into the national distribution grid. The government’s policy then was to pay rates higher that what the market  called for, in order to encourage the development of alternative energy.  But  the payments have cost Elecricité de France (EDF), the state-owned electricity  provider and one of the world’s largest utility companies, more that one  billion euros annually, according to some reports. 'We need to have rules for this sector just as with other sectors,' Kosciusko- Morizet said, following a speech outlining her plans for sustainable  development and the environment.    Appointed in November, the minister said she wants to put ecology back on  the political agenda. 'This is the year of truth, responsibility and justice,' she said. In a previous address to Parliament, Kosciusko-Morizet said that most of the  photovoltaic panels installed in France were made in China with a 'highly  questionable carbon footprint' and that the industry should be about creating  jobs in France.  A parliamentary report also suggested that farmers had been building special  hangars just to install photovoltaic panels to benefit from the high prices;  several thousand farmers have signed up to sell the electricity generated by  these panels to the distribution grid. Last year, EDF received an overwhelming number of requests daily from  people who wanted to be part of the grid, according to the authorities.  The  freeze on installations is thus angering many who don’t see the justice in the  French government’s handling of the situation, despite similar moves in other  European countries. Environmentalist groups say that the official argument that photovoltaic  installations are costing too much is a false one as the money used for  renewable energy is passed on to the consumer through a certain tax, the  CSPE (Contribution to the Public Electricity Service).  This has been raised from  4. 5 euros per megawatt-hour to 7. 5 euros for 2011. 'The problem began with the long waiting list to get connected to the  network,' said Joël Vormus, energy and environment project manager for the  Comité de Liaison Energies Renouvelables (CLER) a non-government  organisation that groups more than 150 professionals throughout France. 'The government saw that there was a huge list of people who wanted to  subscribe to a branch of EDF but this list was completely artificial because  people were encouraged to subscribe very early,' he told IPS.  'People were subscribing to the list without having the financial means to  install the projects or without analyzing the risks.  Some of the people who  subscribe later abandon the project for various reasons,' he added. Vormus said that CLER also realized that 'a huge part of this waiting list was  occupied by EDF itself' through its own subsidiary EDF Energies Nouvelles.   The stated mission of this subsidiary is to 'produce green energy and develop  alternative energies'.  'So one of EDF’s branches was managing the waiting list while another branch  was subscribing to it,' Vormus said.  'This could be a conflict of interest. ' Most of France’s electricity is generated by the country’s 58 nuclear plants - a  concern to environmentalists who see solar power as a viable alternative.   CLER and its partners believe that the suspension of projects will have an  adverse impact on the solar-energy industry in the country. 'We’re not for the suspension because it actually kills the industry,' Vormus  said.  'You don’t do that to the car industry.  You don’t do that the nuclear  industry.  People are calling us saying ‘we’re going bankrupt’.  Still we hope the  government uses the time to do things right. 'Some experts say that states are miscalculating the financial impact of  photovoltaic energy.  While big power plants need to have concentrated  power-production sites and also need to maintain strong networks, the  benefit of photovoltaic systems is that the electricity is used locally, thus  saving money, they say. In neighbouring Belgium, for instance, homeowners are encouraged to get  involved in the solar-power movement, and many ordinary people have  installed panels on their roofs.  Many report satisfaction with producing their  own electricity and seeing their bills from energy company Electrabel reduced. But governmental 'eco-payments' there, too, have been going down. Katty, a social worker who lives in Ghent, installed her panels last October  with a government-subsidized 8000-euro loan.  The rules decree that she  could have only enough panels to provide energy for her own consumption.  If  she produces more, it is given to the grid, not sold.  Her eco-subsidy for using  solar energy was also decreased to 340 euros from the 450 euros the  government offered in 2009. 'The government seems to have changed their mind a bit because now  everyone is installing panels,' she told IPS.  'I see lots of panels in my  neighbourhood.  I don’t think they expected it to be so popular. '  