Over the years, the Kadars, a dwindling aboriginal tribe who live on the borders  of the southern Indian states of Kerala and Tamil Nadu, have survived  pestilences, extreme exploitation and even mass sterilisations.  But a new  government plan to build a hydroelectric dam across the Chalakudy River would  have been the death knell for the group who now number about 1,500. With the Ministry of Environment and Forest veto of the proposed 140 million  U. S.  dollar dam project at Athirapilli in the valley of the Western Ghats, the  Kadars have gotten a reprieve. The decision of the Environment Ministry is 'a major success for the forest  and the tribe,' A.  Latha, an environmentalist and research co-ordinator of the  Thrissur-based River Research Centre, told IPS. Local resistance and judicial intervention by the High Court of Kerala have also  come to the aid of the Kadars and the unique flora and fauna of the forested  hilly area of the Chalakudy river basin. The Kadar community is one of the six endangered food-gathering  communities in India according to anthropologists.  Their population in 1961  was just 800. Ayyan, a member of the tribe, says that many community huts will be  submerged if the state continues the work on the dam.  'We hear the death  knell of our beloved river,' the 60-year-old man told IPS. 'The government does not give adequate basic amenities to us at the  settlement area, where living conditions are very bad.  Their assurance on  amenities is a pipe- dream.  Now they want our river and forest for their  benefits,' Ayyan said. P.  Gopakumar, a Malayali author, told IPS that the government is guilty of  sponsoring violence against tribal society in the name of the dam.  'Acting on  behalf of the middle men in the market sector, the promoters in government  and private agencies are ignoring the rights of the tribe,' he said. According to Joy Kaitharam, general secretary of the Thrissur-based Human  Rights Protection Centre which fights for the rights of indigenous people,  there has been no letup in the atrocities inflicted on the tribe since 87 Kadars  were forcibly sterilised at the Mattathoor Government Primary Health Centre,  near Kodakara in 1976. 'Since the conduct of sterilisations, the population of the tribe has remained  stagnant.  Today, Kadar men are tortured by officials on charges of forest theft  and for agitating against the dam,' Kaitharam told IPS. Prof.  S.  K.  Tiwari, who compiled ‘Encyclopaedia of Indian Tribals’, pointed out  that 'Kadars shifted from traditional occupation to snake charmers as well as  sellers of honey and wax since 1940. ''Because of the change of life style, very high morbidity is prevailing in the  tribal belt.  There is no modern health facility at the settlement,' says S.  P.   Ravi, convener of the Chalakudy River Protection Forum.  'Kadar people need  highly nutritious food for managing anaemia. 'Environmentalists say that the immediate fallout of building the dam will be  the fragmentation of the habitat for elephants, tigers, lion-tailed macaques  and other species that roam the contiguous sanctuaries and national parks in  the Parambikulam-Anamalai range of Western Ghats - one of the  internationally identified eco-regions for long-term conservation in India. Due to the rich diversity of fish in the Chalakudy River, the National Bureau of  Fish Genetic Resources in Lucknow has suggested the river area be declared  as a 'fish sanctuary. 'Gopinathan Nair, president of the Limnological Association of Kerala, fears  construction of dam will prevent both upstream and downstream migration of  some of the fish - which is a vital activity for their survival.  'Depletion of fish  and mussels will certainly affect the environment surrounding the 140  kilometre-long river,' Nair points out. Cambridge-based Bird Life International has noted the importance of the  endemic birds nesting in the Athirapilli-Vazhachal hills. Botanists have focused on the abundant and diverse flora that has not yet  been fully catalogued in the area.  'Experts from government agencies are  silent on the actual volume of trees that would be submerged,' says  Ravikumar, a botanist in Kochi.   