Billions of dollars are being made by investors in a  speculative 'food bubble' that's created record food prices,  starving millions and destabilising countries, experts now  conclude. Wall Street investment firms and banks, along with their kin  in London and Europe, were responsible for the technology  dot-com bubble, the stock market bubble, and the recent U. S.   and UK housing bubbles.  They extracted enormous profits and  their bonuses before the inevitable collapse of each.  Now they've turned to basic commodities.  The result? At a  time when there has been no significant change in the global  food supply or in food demand, the average cost of buying  food shot up 32 percent from June to December 2010,  according to the U. N.  Food and Agriculture Organisation  (FAO).  Nothing but price speculation can explain wheat prices  jumping 70 percent from June to December last year when  global wheat stocks were stable, experts say. 'There is no food shortage in the world.  Food is simply  priced out of the reach of the world's poorest people,' said  Robert Fox of Oxfam Canada in reference to the estimated one  billion people who go hungry. 'Hunger is not a food production problem.  It is an income  problem,' Fox told IPS. The conditions that created the 2007-08 price hike and food  riots have not changed, he said.  It is no surprise to see  record-high food prices and riots again in Egypt, Algeria,  Jordan and elsewhere. Weather used to be the big determinant of food prices, but  not anymore.  Trillions of dollars have been pumped into food  commodities markets in the last few years thanks to  deregulation of commodities trading in the U. S. , reports  Olivier De Schutter, the United Nations Special Rapporteur  on the Right to Food. In an analysis of the food price crisis of 2007-08, De  Schutter documents how the U. S.  government passed  legislation in 2000 deregulating the food commodity markets  and for the first time permitted speculation on speculation. Here's how it used to work.  In January, Farmer Brown would  sign a contract to sell his 2011 future crop to a grain  trader like industry giant Cargill for 100 dollars a tonne.   In the fall, Cargill would then sell Farmer Brown's grain at  whatever price they could get to a bakery or feedlot company  for cattle.  These 'futures' contracts insulated both the  farmer and the grain trader from wild price fluctuations. Now, after the passage of the U. S.  Commodity Futures  Modernisation Act in 2000, Cargill could sell Farmer's Brown  'futures' contract to an investment bank on Wall Street for  120 dollars a tonne, who could in turn sell it to a European  investment company for 150 dollars a tonne and then sell it  to a U. S.  public pension fund for 175 dollars a tonne and so  on.  Add in some complex financial instruments like  'derivatives', 'index funds', 'hedges', and 'swaps', and  food become part of yet another highly-profitable  speculative bubble. A deeply-flawed global financial system was largely  responsible for the 2007-08 food crisis, concluded De  Schutter in a September 2010 briefing note. 'Speculators increasingly entered the market in order to  pro&#64257;t from short-term changes in price,' wrote agricultural  economist Jayati Ghosh, in a more recent analysis of the  2007-08 food price spike. With the pending implosion of 'the U. S.  housing &#64257;nance  market, large investors, especially institutional investors  such as hedge funds and pension funds and even banks,  searched for other avenues of investment to &#64257;nd new sources  of pro&#64257;t,' said Ghosh, a professor at Jawaharlal Nehru  University in New Delhi in the Journal of Agrarian Change. Food commodity speculation became the 'hot ticket' and  unregulated trading zoomed from 0. 77 trillion dollars in  2002 to seven trillion dollars in 2007.  Food prices shot  upwards until the speculators took their profits in the  first half of 2008 to cover their losses in the U. S.  housing  and other markets, she concluded.  By the fall of 2008 prices  stabilised but remained substantially higher than they were  before the speculative bubble. 'At the end of December 2008, the FAO estimated that 33  countries were experiencing severe or moderate food crises,  with conditions in at least 17 countries worse compared to  October 2008,' Ghosh said. And 2008 was a year of record grain production  internationally. Now there is a new and bigger food price bubble that began  midway through 2010.  It's no surprise since nothing was done  to change the conditions, Ghosh wrote.  Regulations that  could prevent or at least limit such speculative financial  activity are not in place.   The 2010-11 food price bubble is blamed on last summer's  Russian drought and increased consumption by India and  China.  However, FAO figures clearly show grain consumption  by those latter two countries has actually fallen, mainly  because many simply can't afford to buy as much grain, Ghosh  told IPS in an email interview.   In India, there has also  been 'diet shifts to more vegetables and dairy products',  she said. The Russian drought simply sparked this latest speculative  bubble.  Russia did lose 33 percent of its wheat harvest, but  it had plenty of wheat stocks on hand to make up the  difference.  Instead of using those stocks, the Russian  government was persuaded by multinational grain companies to  ban wheat exports. That enabled those companies to break their low-price export  contracts with Egypt, Bangladesh and other countries and  sell their grain on the inflated domestic wheat market, says  Devlin Kuyek of GRAIN, a small international non-profit  organisation that works to support small farmers. 'Big companies now control much of the Russian agriculture,'  Kuyek said in an interview. GRAIN has documented how foreign and local investors have  set up huge, vertically integrated 'agro-holdings',  particularly in the southern grain belt where they now  control 40-50 percent of total grain production. Russia is a major wheat exporter and Swiss-owned Glencore  exports most of Russia's wheat.  However, GRAIN research  reveals that Glencore lobbied to get an export ban allowing  the company to cancel its low-price contracts without  penalty. To ease the 'sting' of the ban, Russia also promised one  billion dollars in low-interest loans and subsidies for  grain producers. 'Countries like Egypt really got screwed and the grain  traders made a killing,' Kuyek said. 