The cultivation of coffee beans for fair trade has turned the fortunes of this  historical cash crop around in some poor rural areas on the slopes of Mount  Elgon in eastern Uganda. The east African country’s government liberalised the coffee export market in  1990s, attracting many coffee buyers to the Arabica coffee-growing districts.   Increased competition went hand in hand with cash payments to farmers from  the sale of coffee, as opposed to the old system where they had to wait for  cooperatives to pay them.  Nevertheless, the prices remained low at 0. 35 dollars for one kg of coffee and  farmers could not break even.  Some farmers lost interest in coffee cultivation  while others started to cut corners.  The coffee was not pulped well; it was  mixed with husks and sand to increase weight.  Concerned about the decline in the quality and quantity of the historical cash  crop, some former staff and members of the Bugisu Cooperative Union  formed Gumutindo Cooperative Trading and adopted fair trade rules.   Gumutindo means quality in the native language of the Arabica coffee- growing tribe that lives on the slopes of Mount Elgon in eastern Uganda. Sam Magona, one of the founders of Gumutindo, told IPS that by joining the  fair trade movement they wanted to reclaim the reputation of Ugandan  Arabica coffee on the world market and to ensure that farmers got higher  prices for their produce.  Gumutindo has since established it own warehouse in Mbale, some 300 km  east of Uganda’s capital Kampala.  It is affiliated to the British-based Fairtrade  Foundation and exports organic coffee to Café Direct Plc and Trade Aid,  among others.   Magona told IPS that, 'fair trade practices sensitise farmers by reminding  them of the things they know about coffee.  Everyone growing coffee knows  how to produce good quality coffee but they had neglected these practices.   Fair trade has given the farmers better prices for their coffee.  So they are able  to solve most of their problems. ' Apart from paying higher prices, Gumutindo provides a social premium with  each kilogramme of coffee that is produced.  This premium comes in the form  of a bonus to farmers which they can use to set up support projects in the  areas where coffee is cultivated that are also aimed at those people not  engaged in coffee production.  'Our rates guarantee farmers a second payment at the end of the season  when the coffee has been sold and there is an additional social premium  which the societies can use on community projects of their choice,' he says. Gumutindo boasts a membership of over 15 societies, each representing 500- 1,000 coffee farmers.  Nimrod Wambete, the newly elected Gumutindo  chairperson, explains that more village societies across Mount Elgon’s slopes  were joining them because of the social premium payment that has enabled  societies to construct better storage facilities.    Farmers are also helped to access free coffee seedlings and extension services  for organic coffee cultivation. 'Our farmers never got benefits from their coffee like they are getting from  Gumutindo now,' Wambete insists.  'Fair trade price means a good life to  farmers.  They get better prices so they can invest in their farms, they pay  school fees for their children, they build better houses and they have  improved living standards. 'A kilogramme of coffee was going for about two dollars at the end of 2010  while coffee buyers not operating under fair trade principles were paying 1. 60  dollars for the same quantity.  In some rural areas the price offered by  middlemen to unsuspecting farmers was far less than 1. 60 dollars.    When IPS visited Gumutindo’s busy warehouse, the workers — all women— were  sorting coffee under tree shades.  For grading purposes, they remove defective  coffee beans.  Each worker is paid per kilo of defective coffee beans sorted  during the eight hours of work and receives a dividend at the end of the year. Mary Namwano, one of the workers at the cooperative, told IPS that the  earnings help her family, which would otherwise be totally dependent on her  husband’s meagre salary.  'The children would not be going to school if I was  not working here,' she said.  Namwano’s husband is employed as a municipal  law enforcement officer earning about 30 dollars a month -- not enough to  run a five-member family.    Lydia Nabulumbi, Gumutindo’s quality assurance officer, told IPS that the  sorting process is done both by machines and humans to ensure quality.  'The  criteria for determining whether to buy the coffee are strict. 'When the coffee comes through the gates, our quality assurance people  check the beans.  Quality is about the physical appearance of the coffee beans  and how clean they are.  Then they check the moisture content and the  number of defects.  When they decide that it is good quality, they give  permission for the coffee to be bought and stored in the warehouse for  export,' she adds. Over the years, the coffee beans that Gumutindo receives has been cleaner,  which has meant less sorting than before. 'Usually when selling at a low price, the traders’ priority is quantity rather  than quality but at Gumutindo we have demonstrated that quality pays and it  has worked,' enthuses Nabulumbi.  