To allow least developed countries (LDCs) to protect nascent industries, they are  not required to cut tariffs for industrial goods and fisheries in the Doha  Development Round.  However, tariffs cuts will affect them if they are members  of customs unions where some of their neighbours are larger developing  countries without LDC status. For example, 'Nigeria is not an LDC but the nine LDCs in the Economic  Community of West African States (ECOWAS) may also be bound by the  commitments that their more powerful neighbour agrees to in the Doha  Round,' explains Aileen Kwa in response to questions from IPS about what lies  ahead for LDCs at the World Trade Organisation (WTO) during 2011. Kwa is coordinator of the trade and development programme at the South  Centre, an intergovernmental organisation representing developing countries  and based in Geneva.  'This is the problem: tariff cuts, whether in agriculture or NAMA (non- agricultural market access), are not going to help poor countries with food  security, industrialisation or increasing their domestic production.  In most  African countries, agriculture has been destroyed by liberalisation, so they  need to put up their tariffs instead of reducing them,' Kwa argues. This point of view is shared by an African diplomat who spoke on condition of  anonymity due to the sensitivity of negotiating positions: 'Sectorals (deep cuts  or elimination of tariffs in certain industrial sectors by some developing  countries, supposedly voluntary) will affect LDCs that are in custom unions  with large developing countries, particularly those LDCs that depend on tariffs  for their revenue.  'It is difficult to bring this subject to the negotiating table.  In the economic  partnership agreements (EPAs) being negotiated with the European Union  there is at least the recognition that the implementation of the EPAs may have  adverse effects.  In the WTO we do not have that. 'Mohammad Abdul Hannan, Bangladesh’s ambassador and coordinator of the  LDCs group at the WTO, admitted in an interview with IPS that the Doha  Round would cause preference erosion for LDCs.  'That is an issue.  LDCs have duty-free and quota-free market access to most  developed countries under various autonomous preference schemes.   Reduction of tariffs across the board will make LDCs less competitive in  comparison to other developing countries.  Therefore, there should be other  measures to compensate LDCs for subsequent losses,' says Hannan. LDCs need more clarity from other WTO members on tariffs cuts and tariff  lines where LDCs will be given duty-free and quota-free market access, he  adds. Kwa doubts that the conclusion of the round will benefit LDCs at all.  She  points to studies showing that, apart from a handful of developing countries  like Brazil, China and India that would suffer losses but also enjoy gains, the  majority of developing countries are facing mainly losses.  LDCs’ total share of world trade is only one percent and their exports consist  mainly of natural resources and some manufacturing and agricultural  products. 'The issue is production and until these countries can actually produce,  having market access holds no real value for them.  The gains for LDCs and  other lower income countries from the Doha Round are not apparent,' Kwa  argues. Hannan disagrees on this point: 'Richer countries and large developing ones  will benefit the most from the conclusion of the round because of their  capacity to trade.  But through special and differential treatment LDCs can also  benefit from the international trading system.  'Developed and developing countries who are able to do so have to support  the efforts of the LDCs to build and expand their supply-side (production)  capacities. ' Special and differential treatment involves exemptions and  assistance for developing countries. Hannan adds that, 'as LDCs, we expect the Doha Round to protect and  augment our productive capacity and enhance our effective market access.   The Doha Round, with development at its core, came about to correct the  imbalances of the previous rounds.  'The final outcome of Doha must ensure that development remains the  centrepiece of the agreement. 'Hannan is confident that trade liberalisation will bring about growth,  employment and development for the poorest countries: 'For us, market  access, cotton and services are very crucial.  These have to be complemented  with aid for trade for capacity building and trade facilitation for LDCs to  beneficially integrate into the multilateral trading system. 'We are encouraged by the momentum generated recently and would like to  believe that we are in the last lap of this decade-long round.  Failure to  conclude the round would affect LDCs the most. ' It is hoped that the just-concluded World Economic Forum in Davos,  Switzerland, will give new impetus to the round.  Pascal Lamy, WTO director  general, asked the chairs of the negotiating groups to produce new texts by  April and the rhythm has intensified.  Kwa regards the high unemployment rates in many countries — due to the  global economic recession — as a significant spur for opposition to the  conclusion of the round.  