Last year's severe drought in the Amazon will pump billions of  tonnes of additional carbon dioxide (CO2) into the atmosphere,  a new report has found. Researchers calculate that millions of trees died in 2010,  which means the Amazon is soaking up much less CO2 from the  atmosphere, and those dead trees will now release all the  carbon they've accumulated over 300 or more years. The widespread 2010 drought follows a similar drought in  2005 which itself will put an additional five billion tonnes  of CO2 into the atmosphere, Simon Lewis of University of  Leeds in the UK and colleagues calculate in a study  published Thursday in Science.  The United States emitted 5. 4  billion tonnes of CO2 from fossil fuel use in 2009. The two droughts will end up adding an estimated 13 billion  tonnes of additional CO2 - equivalent to combined emissions  in 2009 from China and the U. S.  - and likely accelerating  global warming. 'New growth in the region will not offset those releases,'  Lewis told IPS. After the 2005 drought, Lewis and Brazilian scientist Paulo  Brando from the Amazon Environmental Research Institute  (IPAM) led teams of researchers on the ground to assess the  impacts.  They determined that only a few trees died per  hectare, and so while the forest canopy cover looked  relatively unchanged, there had been a significant change in  the forest's carbon balance. Most years, the Amazon absorbs about 1. 5 billion tonnes of  CO2 from the atmosphere.  This is crucial in helping to  offset some of CO2 emissions from burning fossil fuels that  is overheating the planet. However, researchers found during and after the 2005 drought  that the Amazon stopped absorbing carbon for two years and  became a source of CO2 amounting to roughly five billion  tonnes over a period of four to eight years as the dead  trees rot and release their stored carbon.  Lewis and Brando  expect something similar with the 2010 drought - but with  many more trees killed. 'The 2010 drought was spread over a huge area several  million square kilometres in size,' Lewis said. 'Having two events of this magnitude in such close  succession is extremely unusual, but is unfortunately  consistent with those climate models that project a grim  future for Amazonia,' he said in a release. Those models show a decline in rainfall in much of the  region as the climate warms.  Most worrying is if these  staggeringly large CO2 emissions from droughts become part  of a feedback loop of drying out the region even more,  leading to more frequent and intense droughts.  However, it  is too soon to tell if that is underway, Lewis told IPS. The fact that Amazon may be near a tipping point of  unstoppable decline was the warning in a million-dollar  study by the world's leading research institutions IPS  reported on a year ago. The study, 'Assessment of the Risk of Amazon Dieback', found  that a combination of climate change, deforestation and fire  could lead to the inevitable loss of 66 percent of the  current 5. 3 million sq km forest by 2075.  That means the  Amazon would shrink from covering an area the size of the  entire continental United States to the state of Alaska. The rainforest literally makes much of its own rain, but  when too much forest cover is lost, this unique feature  declines leading to further drying and increased potential  for fire, the researchers found.  And that leads to even less  rain in what becomes a spiral of decline. 'The forest eventually converts to cerrado (the Brazilian  savanna) after a lot of fire, human misery, loss of  biodiversity and emission of carbon into the atmosphere,'  Thomas Lovejoy, biodiversity chair at the Washington DC- based Heinz Centre for Science, Economics and the  Environment, told IPS at the time. 'It may happen faster than that study projected given the  droughts of 2005 and 2010,' said leading tropical biologist  Daniel Nepstad of IPAM in Belem, Brazil. Over the past four years there has been a 25 percent decline  in rainfall in the southeast Amazon, sparking huge fires  that cover up to 10,000 sq km, Nepstad told IPS.  The smoke  from the fires inhibits rainfall, further drying the  forests. 'There seems to be a change in the regional climate,' he  speculated. Fortunately, there has been a big decline in deforestation  in the Amazon in recent years.  'In (the state of) Matto  Grosso it has fallen 67 percent,' he said. Brazilian and state governments get some of the credit,  along with falling prices for soy and cattle.  Carbon offset  programmes like Reduced Emissions from Deforestation and  Degradation (REDD) have also silenced the chain saws as land  owners and others wait to see if the promised billions of  dollars for protecting forests materialises. 'Some REDD money is starting to come in,' Nepstad said.  'If  we can do REDD right it could have a big impact. 'Nepstad said other forests are also shifting from absorbing  CO2 to emitting the global warming gas.  A particular worry  is the Boreal forest that spans the top of the globe and is  much larger than Amazon.  'The Boreal is losing its green, especially in North  America, from disease, insect outbreaks and fires,' he said. There is potential for 'huge feedbacks' in the Boreal which  has far more carbon stored in it than anywhere else. 'Forests diebacks are taking place all around the world.  The  evidence is quite sobering,' he said. This reinforces the urgent need to reduce emissions of  fossils fuels and to develop a global land strategy to turn  sources of CO2 into sinks for CO2, he said. 'Most of the evidence shows climate change is speeding up.   Meanwhile political action on climate is slowing down,'  Nepstad added. 