At just 13 years old, Felix Finkbeiner may be one of the  youngest participants in the two-week U. N.  Forum on Forests,  but he already has years of environmental activism under his  belt. And he's armed with a business card: 'Stop Talking, Start  Planting — Felix Finkbeiner, Climate Justice Administrator,  UNEP (the U. N.  Environment Programme) Junior Board 2008-2010  Children Council. 'The teenaged environmental celebrity from Germany has  motivated thousands of children around the world to take  part in global initiatives against deforestation. 'We will plant more trees.  We will fight for our future,'  Finkbreiner told IPS after the launch of the Year of  Biodiversity of Forests 2011 Monday.  He has coauthored a  book, 'Tree for Tree — We children save the world now' is  now engaged in efforts to involve one million kids to plant  new trees by 2020. The Forum, which is the only global body for comprehensive  deliberations on international forest policy, is focusing on  issues related to forest use, land tenure, the role of  native communities and other social and cultural aspects of  forests. Before attending the current session, Finkbeiner  participated in several international gatherings where he  delivered speeches explaining why students should be  concerned about deforestation, considered one of the major  factors responsible for climatic changes and rapid loss of  species. Finkbreiner first became active in the environmental  movement at the age of seven, inspired by giants like Noble  Peace Prize Winner Wangari Maathai. Maathai, who founded Green Belt tree-planting movement in  Kenya, was also present at the launch of the Forest Year  2011 in New York.  At a news conference earlier this week,  she noted that the values of forests and its services to  human-kind were often 'taken for granted'. '[They are] seen as resources that are unlimited,' Maathai  said.  'But we all know now that we are facing situations  where these forests are disappearing. ' Forests cover about 31 percent of the world's total land  area.  More than half of that area is located in just five  countries: Brazil, China, Canada, Russia, and the United  States.  Forest biodiversity provides over 5,000 commercial  products, including food, medicines, and clothing. Experts on biological diversity and climate change say the  rate of deforestation has slowed somewhat over the past  decade, yet each year about 13 million hectares of the  world's forests - an area the size of Greece or Nicaragua -  are lost or degraded, with disastrous effects on the lives  indigenous peoples. In a report released this week, the U. N.  Food and  Agriculture Organisation says the forest industry is  'responding' to numerous environmental and social concerns  by improving sustainability of resource use.  But  environmental groups that work closely with the forest- dependent communities' dispute that assertion. 'Industrial resource extraction is posing grave threats to  the survival of indigenous peoples in the Amazon Basin,'  said a statement by the California-based Amazon Watch group  a day after the launch of the Forest Year 2011.  'There are  serious moral, legal and financial reasons for corporations  to stem the tide of abuse and respect indigenous peoples'  rights. 'Numerous studies suggest that at the current rate of  deforestation, nearly half of the Amazon could be lost or  severely degraded by 2020 if commercial interests continued  to exploit the region in violation of international rules  requiring that they must obtain 'prior and informed consent'  of the indigenous peoples. 'The oil industry, for one, is in its infancy when it comes  to developing and implementing policies to respect  indigenous rights,' said Amazon Watch's Mitch Anderson.   'Although some companies, such as Talisman Energy, are  taking cautious steps forward, other companies, such as  Chevron, appear to be burying their heads in the sand. 'The Amazon rainforest is the world's largest and most bio- diverse tropical region in the world and is considered home  to one-third of the Earth's plant and animal species.  About  400 distinct indigenous peoples depend on the rainforest.  Released Tuesday, a new Amazon Watch report, entitled 'The  Right to Decide: The Importance of Respecting Free, Prior  and Informed Consent (FPIC)', says that respecting  indigenous peoples' rights 'is not just a moral imperative,  but also a business necessity' for corporations to avoid  financial risk, reputational damage, divestment campaigns  and operational delays due to social unrest. Ahmed Djoghlaf, chief of the U. N.  biodiversity treaty  secretariat, agrees that initiatives to protect forests  cannot be carried out effectively without protecting the  rights of their 'custodians', by which he means the world's  370 million indigenous peoples. He is calling on U. N.  member states to sign the Nagoya  protocol to the biological diversity treaty on 'access to  genetic resources and the fair and equitable sharing of  benefits arising from their utilisation. ' He thinks the  implementation of the protocol is a must for efforts to save  forests. Though appreciative of U. N.  initiatives to protect the  world's forests and their inhabitants' rights, indigenous  activists remain sceptical about the prospects of any  effective implementation of international treaties. 'The problem is they do not understand,' said Kai Landau, a  native activist from Hawaii, of governments and businesses  that violate native peoples' rights.  'There is a huge  disconnect,' he told IPS.  'They don't understand that  everybody could enjoy those treasures, including them. ''You can live in New York City, but you cannot be unaffected  by the reality that exists in some remote place thousands of  miles away,' he added, alluding to the loss of forests and  rapid destruction of the cultures of ancient peoples who  have been living there for thousands of years. For his part, Djoghlaf sees the U. N.  biological diversity  treaty as the 'daughter of Rio who has now grown up' - a  reference to the landmark 1992 treaty on environment and  development. 