As food prices rose for the seventh month in a row in January,  contributing to recent popular unrest in the Middle East and a  spike in commodities purchases by developing countries last  week, some analysts are quick to make comparisons to the dry  years of 2007-2008. But others warn against panic and oversimplified predictions  of an impending food crisis, which contribute to price  volatility. 'It is important to underline — and we've been trying this  rather unsuccessfully — a high food price index doesn't  necessarily mean a food crisis,' Abdolreza Abbassian, senior  economist at the United Nation's Food and Agriculture  Organisation (FAO), told IPS in a telephone interview. After a crisis in 1974, world food prices fell steadily over  the following decades and hit an all-time low in the early  2000s.  But beginning in 2005, food prices soared, ushering  in the crisis of 2007-2008.  In post-mortem studies and short-term forward-looking  simulations, including those conducted by the United States  Department of Agriculture and jointly by the Organisation  for Economic Co-operation and Development and the FAO,  researchers largely concluded that the steep prices would  continue.  'It is reasonable to expect prices to remain high in the  years to come (especially as economies recover from the  financial crisis),' stated a 122-page report published last  year by the International Food Policy Research Institute  (IFPRI) titled 'Reflections on the Global Food Crisis'. Although the high prices documented today were essentially  predicted, similarities to 2007-2008 seem to be fuelling  observers' panic. What is similar this time around?'The underlying drivers of the 2007-2008 crisis were  interlinked macro factors: a weak U. S.  dollar, rising oil  prices, increased bio fuels demand and strong economic  growth worldwide,' Derek Headey, senior researcher at IFPRI  and co-author of 'Reflections', told IPS in an e-mail  interview. 'What is broadly the same [now] is that the macroeconomic  environment is still conducive to higher prices and whenever  you get higher prices, it only takes some small shocks to  set off short-run volatility,' he explained. The U. S.  dollar remains weak, oil prices have exceeded 100  dollars per barrel, high demand for biofuels continues and  strong growth in China, India and other large developing  countries are creating some inflationary pressures, Headey  noted. Some short-term characteristics also seem to be similar.   Once prices surged in 2007, interlinked factors created a  food price bubble.  The most important of these were crop  failures, trade restrictions and panic buying — and likely  speculation and hoarding, although those are difficult to  measure — he argued.  Ongoing droughts in places like China, Somalia, Kenya and  Niger threaten food security and unusually large wheat and  rice purchases by Algeria and Bangladesh, respectively, last  week — and last month's announcement by Saudi Arabia of  plans to double its wheat supply — are leading some to fear  the prospect of panic buying. Jayati Ghosh, agricultural economist and professor at  Jawaharlal Nehru University in New Delhi, told IPS's Stephen  Leahy in a recent article that we are in the midst of a new,  bigger food bubble. 'The 2010-2011 food price bubble is blamed on last summer's  Russian drought and increased consumption by India and  China,' Ghosh told IPS in an e-mail interview.  'However, FAO figures clearly show grain consumption by  those latter two countries has actually fallen, mainly  because many simply can't afford to buy as much grain. '  Instead, she argues, the current bubble is largely fuelled  by financial speculation. Despite these resemblances, analysts point out that  important differences exist.  'The situation — as volatile as  it is — really, in many aspects, is still very different  from what we saw in 2007-2008,' Abbassian told IPS. What is different?For one, wheat stocks are higher now than they were before  the recent crisis, Headey noted, suggesting that we are  better able to cope in case of lost production.  And although  Russia instituted an export ban on wheat following its  drought last year, 'We haven't seen the spread of export  restrictions in other countries or other commodities. 'As for recent cases of accelerated buying, Abbassian  interpreted them as opportunism.  '[There was] a relief in  prices at the end of last week, so people took advantage of  that,' he told IPS.  'The moment prices come down a bit…  people try to jump in and buy more. ''[S]mall countries are price-takers,' he explained.  'I  wouldn't really yet call this panic buying. 'While food prices overall, as measured by FAO's monthly  index, are at their highest levels since the organisation  began monitoring them in 1990, variations exist across crops  and regions. '[R]ice is still even slightly below last year and half as  high as in 2008,' Abbassian noted.  'Wheat and corn are at  least 50 percent higher than last year but still at least 10  to 20 percent lower than 2008. 'Additionally, 'rice, corn and wheat are very critical in  food commodities and we should look at them differently than  things like cereals, sugars and soy,' he said, highlighting  the variability of commodities, prices and trends measured  in FAO's index. 'If you look at countries in Africa that had problems in  2008 who had to import a lot, most had near-record if not  record corn crops' last year, Abbassian told IPS.  '[A]nd  corn, especially white corn, is very important in sub- Saharan countries. 'Jennifer Parmelee, spokesperson for the U. N.  World Food  Programme, noted that the staple foods consumed by the very  poor, namely cereals and rice, have been thus far largely  insulated by the price spikes. 'We do closely follow the rise of international food prices  because we're also buying,' she said.  In case of a crisis,  'those who we support are those who are worst hit. ''While food prices are high globally, in many of the regions  where we work, prices have remained stable and in some cases  have fallen,' she told IPS.  The price of beans in Central  America, for instance, fell in December. And after a bumper 2010 harvest, prices of maize, sorghum  and millet — main staple crops of sub-Saharan Africa —  declined steadily at the end of last year and remain at  relatively low levels, according to the FAO. Uncertainty and VolatilityWe can't exactly know whether or not we are heading into  another food crisis, but what we are seeing is a self- perpetuating pattern of price volatility and uncertainty —  and it will continue until the summer harvests, Abbassian  told IPS. 'Price volatility is one of the reasons for uncertainty in  decision-making processes, be it the farmer or consumer,' he  said.  'Volatility invites volatility. ' The unrest in North Africa seems to be feeding this cycle.   Egypt, for instance, which is in the midst of a revolution —  driven partially by high food prices — is the world's number  one wheat importer.  'When uncertainty prevails in these  countries in this extent and depth, the market pays  particular attention,' Abbassian said. 'I think market actors will be very prudent and pay more  attention to bad news than good news,' he added.  'Good news  will be discarded, bad news will be amplified… Until crops  are actually harvested this summer and they can see it, feel  it, smell it, then they will say, 'okay. ''Looking forward, Abbassian told IPS that, barring any major  exogenous events, such as crop-devastating weather  disasters, 'We are not so concerned about 2010 to 2011',  especially because global food stocks are 'very high'  compared to 2008.  'Our concern will be what will happen in 2011-2012,' he  said.  However, '[p]eople should not discard chances of good  weather… We [could] get a bumper crop in 2011 and see prices  correct themselves. ' 'There is a positive note to all this,' Abbassian noted,  admitting, 'but no one will put their money on it. '