Political leaders have committed to ramping up restoration of  the world's forests and tackling poverty in forest communities  as part of pledges made at the ninth session Forum on Forests,  which wrapped up at the United Nations headquarters in New  York last week. Rwanda, in central eastern Africa, led the way with promises  to launch a 25-year plan to tackle ecosystem degradation and  improve rural livelihoods, a move hailed by environmental  groups including the International Union for Conservation of  Nature (IUCN). 'If other countries are inspired by Rwanda and follow suit,  then what we could be witnessing is the beginning of the  largest restoration initiative the world has ever seen,'  said IUCN's director general Julia Marton-Lefèvre. Rwanda's forests diminished rapidly in the 1990s due to poor  management and land use conflict.  However, with recent  economic growth the government is looking to reverse the  trend, according to the nation's minister of land and  environment, Stanislas Kamanzi. Other developments included the signing of a Memorandum of  Understanding between the UNFF Secretariat and the German  government for an 800,000-dollar project on forest financing  for Africa and Least Developed Countries (LDCs). The biennial UNFF, which this year coincided with the launch  of the International Year of the Forests 2011, is attended  by representatives from all 192 member states of the U. N.   However, agreements negotiated through the process are not  legally binding. With a theme of 'Forests and People', this year's forum  resulted in commitments to better coordinate forest  conservation with local management schemes and poverty  reduction. In wrapping up the two weeks of meetings, a ministerial  declaration was released acknowledging 'the crucial role of  local people, including women, and local and indigenous  communities, in achieving sustainable forest management'.  One of the key goals of NGOs working at the forum this year  was to advance the plight of land rights for forest peoples,  with new data from IUCN showing forests are worth up to 130  billion dollars a year to the world's poorest communities. Although traditionally priced for their timber, the report  shows forests also provide an estimated 1. 6 billion people  worldwide with food, fuel, medicines, energy, income and  employment. 'When deciding how to spend budgets, governments usually  don't factor in the economic returns to investing in  locally-controlled forestry,' report author Lucy Emerton  said.  'They thereby miss a critical opportunity to invest in  stimulating economic growth, sustainable development and  poverty reduction. 'While the economic, social and sustainability benefits of  locally-controlled forestry are well known, only 47 percent  of the legal rights over forests are managed by local  communities — and IUCN believes this figure needs to  increase. 'Lots of people don't really own the forests they use, or  they own them in their own heads, customarily, but they  don't legally own them,' Gill Shepherd, IUCN's thematic  adviser on poverty and landscapes, told IPS. 'Very often they are counted as squatters or illegal  thieves.  Now I'm not saying every forest in the world should  belong to local indigenous people, but I think a far higher  proportion could do so. 'While the U. N. 's premier forest scheme REDD+, negotiated in  Cancún last December, has aimed to place local communities  at the centre of forest governance, critics say the  safeguards are negated by industry-friendly policies and  failure of implementation at a national level. Vicky Tauli-Corpuz, an indigenous person from the Besao  mountain province in the Philippines, told IPS that despite  her people being granted legal titles on their forest lands,  the rights were largely symbolic. 'The possession by indigenous peoples of these titles still  does not guarantee their security of tenure over these  forests, as licenses for mining and plantations are still  given by the state to private business people and  politicians,' Tauli-Corpuz said. Other environmental groups believe the increasing demand for  wood-based bio-energy and the continued conversion of  forests to plantations are the greatest threats to forest  communities. According to Dr.  Rachel Smolker, of BiofuelWatch, urgent  action is needed to regulate emerging industries such as the  biofuel sector, if REDD+ is to work as intended. Highlighting the gravity of the situation, Smolker said,  'Scientific models predict that if the demand for wood-based  energy continues to rise unabated, all forests and  grasslands will be converted to bio-energy plantations by  2060. 'However, political leaders at the forefront of REDD+,  including Norway's agriculture and food minister Lars Peder  Brekk, believe the agreement is on the right track. In an interview at UNFF last week, Brekk told IPS the scheme  had a huge responsibility, but it was making progress for  both conservation as well as protection of indigenous  communities. 'What we hoped to do (with REDD+) is to start a process  where we take care of the forests and take care of the  interests of the people who are using the forests at the  same time,' he said. 'From the Norwegian point of view it has been very important  for us to give REDD+ a dimension that allows us to take care  of forests in the future, so that we don't break them down,  that we don't destroy them. '