Behind the headlines of mass social forums and violent  protests, fighting oppression and changing the world requires  sustained grassroots action, according to Kenyan social  justice activist Onyango Oloo. With this year's Feb.  6-11 World Social Forum in full swing,  IPS spoke to Oloo, a writer, former political prisoner and  national coordinator of the 2007 WSF, about climate change,  the ongoing protests in North Africa and social movements in  his home country of Kenya.  Excerpts from the interview  follow. Q: What are the big issues being discussed at the 2011 WSF?   A: This year's event in Dakar is organised around what the  WSF is referring to as 'axes'.  There are 12 of them, which  range from issues of dignity, diversity, justice, gender  oppression, recognition of sexual minorities, protection of  the environment, climate justice and struggles against  multinationals and global capitalism, peace and conflict  transformation, to give a very truncated version. I am particularly passionate about social movements and  processes that lead to progressive national liberation  triumphs all over the world, but especially in Africa.  Q: What is your take on the protests occurring across North  Africa? Why are they happening now and do you believe they  could spread to other regions of the continent?  A: I am quite enthused and inspired by what is happening in  Egypt and Tunisia.  Revolutionary upsurges, contrary to  mainstream media hype, are very different from a kettle of  tea boiling over all over a sudden. What is happening today in North Africa is the culmination  of struggles, victories and reverses that have happened over  many decades and are a product of many social contradictions  - not the least of which is the disconnect between the  machinations of neo-liberal imperialism and the popular  aspirations for democracy, social justice, peace and a  better society. Revolutions by their very nature are not manufactured  commodities from some factory conveyer belt that can be  exported 'willy nilly' to other countries.  Nevertheless, the  power of example should act as a catalyst for other national  liberation struggles around Africa and the Middle East. Q: How is climate change affecting populations in Kenya? How  can social activism address issues being driven by climate  change?  A: Profoundly.  Livelihoods are affected.  Water towers are  threatened.  In Kenya, the fact that greedy speculators who  have grabbed some of the rainforests and other natural  reserves also happen to be powerful politicians means that  the ripple effects of climate change will sooner, rather  than later, spill over to the arena of class conflict and  social unrest. To me, climate change justice is part of the wider social  justice and political transformation agenda.  Human beings  are part of the environment and therefore whatever they do,  or is done to them, contributes one way or another to the  degree to which global humankind finds lasting, sustainable  solutions to the challenges foisted on mother earth by  climate change. We are lucky that one of the key organisations spearheading  our Kenyan presence in Dakar is the Pan African Climate  Justice Alliance, the Nairobi-based secretariat of the  continental climate change network. Q: In your opinion, what are the most important social  movements happening in Kenya at the moment?  A: This is a question that is difficult, if not impossible  to answer.  In the first place, one cannot put social  movements in any kind of hierarchy of 'importance' in Kenya.   In the second place, and to be quite candid, social  movements in Kenya are still by and large, very weak with  many of them in their nascent stages. Some of them have been captured by Western-funded NGOs so  their agendas are mere adjuncts of the funding priorities of  North American and European donor agencies.  Nevertheless, I  would single out Bunge la Mwananchi as having made  significant forays in disturbing the complacency of the neo- colonial status quo. Q: What are some successful or alternative models of  development in your country, or in Africa as a whole, that  could be transferred to other areas of the globe?  A: There is a lot of indigenous knowledge that is often  'pooh poohed' by the mainstream Western media.  I am talking  about the reservoir of knowledge and praxis in the area of  herbal and traditional medicine.  Over the last few years  even the medical mainstream is acknowledging that  alternative/traditional health practices have offered  palliatives and healthier approaches in dealing with  ailments and conditions like diabetes, heart disease,  prostrate cancer, tuberculosis and HIV/AIDS. Rwanda has shown the way in dealing with peace and conflict  transformation through their gachatha courts set up in the  aftermath of the terrible genocide of the mid-1990s.  African farmers, like their Asian counterparts, have  superior methods of preserving the ecosystem and conserving  seed knowledge in contrast to the Monsantos of the world. In my opinion, fellow Kenyan compatriots from the Maa  speaking peoples have demonstrated a resilience in holding  onto to their culture without becoming historical relics  consigned to museums. African women, like the women of the Umoja Peace Village  near Nanyuki in central Kenya, have come up with models of  feminist empowerment rooted firmly within their reality as  rural, pastoral ethnic minority communities - a shocker to  those who believe that feminism in Africa is a preserve of  urban based, university educated petit-bourgeois women. Q: What's the best way for social activists to have their  voices heard and to ensure ideas discussed at forums such as  the WSF are translated into real policy changes at the  national and international levels?  The best way to have their voices heard is not to wait for  annual and periodical events like the World Social Forum.  We  talk best through conscious, united, concerted and sustained  political action at the local, national and continental  level. What I am saying in other words that activists should not  pine for the fleeting sound bites on CNN, BBC, Al Jazeera or  even dare I say, IPS, but rather listen to their own sisters  and brothers speaking to them at home, in the local  community and in their own countries as they analyse and  organise around their specific oppressions and challenges. That way, when they do make it to places like Dakar and  Porto Alegre, what their comrades and companeros from around  the world will be hearing will be powerful echoes from their  own struggles back at home. Incidentally, I did not make it to Dakar this year because I  did not have any money to get on the plane to Senegal.  Many  activists around Africa faced this challenge.  It is a rueful  reminder of the class dictated constraints to participating  in such events like the World Social Forum - even when they  take place on the same continent you call home.  