As the powerful collective energy continues to surge through  Dakar, veterans of the World Social Forum (WSF) are taking a  moment to examine the history, trajectory and future of the  alternative global movement. Widely considered the father of the fast-growing  Ecosocialist movement, Joel Kovel has played a leading role  in the WSF since 2003, following the movement from Mumbai to  Nairobi to Belem. Co-author of the Ecosocialist manifesto, which details an  alternative route to humanity's current path of  environmental destruction, Kovel told IPS that we have to  name this 'other world' and position it firmly against the  threat of global capital.  Excerpts from the interview  follow. Q: What has been your role in past WSFs?  A: Ecosocialism is inherently a global — not international —  concept, so the WSF is an ideal place in which to discuss  its main ideas.  We presented the Ecosocialist manifesto in  Nairobi in 2007 and revised it with a group of several  hundred people.  While Ecosocialism is growing magnificently  in the third word, it is the fourth world — the world of the  indigenous, stateless people — that is really at the  forefront of this global issue. Fourth world peoples live in communal relationships and are  directly victimised by predatory oil and mining corporations  that bore into the heart of the earth and destroy  communities that are part of the soil.  So we have depended  on the unique locations of the WSF to disseminate the ideas  of Ecosocialism. Q: Does the World Social Forum sufficiently address the  current ecological crisis?  A: The WSF tends to focus on specific areas within the  broader issue of ecocide or eco-destruction, such as  genetically modified seeds or the acidification of the  oceans or deforestation.  While addressing these issues is  certainly necessary, it is not sufficient to deal with the  magnitude of the crisis, which requires a much broader  diagnosis of the underlying cause of the problem. There is very little theoretical rigor or sharpness about  ecological crisis as a whole at the WSF for many reasons -  people are so terrified of the crisis before us, there are  so many worthwhile causes to be fought for, problems are  diffuse, with different issues rooted in dispersed  localities, no one can decide what the boundaries are  between one crisis and another.  And there are so many  questions, such as when does the crisis about the oceans  become a crisis about the atmosphere? Understandably, people  retreat into single issues like the proliferation of plastic  bottles. Q: What can the WSF do differently to move forward in  solving the crisis?  A: Well there currently exists a definitional problem at the  WSF.  Different issues crop up which are eco-systemic  disruptions — when a forest is destroyed over monoculture  for example.  Each eco-systemic crisis has its own site- specific and concrete reality, such as the Bhopal disaster  in India.  It is the collection of all these different  crises, which are worsening with great rapidity, spreading  outward globally and increasing exponentially, that is the  real ecological crises. If we want to find the cause for all the different systemic  crises, we have to look at them together and find what is  common to them all.  While each problem has its own cause,  virtually every single one of them is linked to capitalist  expansion and can be traced to the door of a bank or an  imperial power.  If the WSF is to deal with this problem, is  has to identify and articulate the problem of global  capital, which can be thought of metaphorically — as a  cancer that is metastasising.  And no matter how you chose to  treat the disease, you must first acknowledge that it is a  reality. Q: How has the WSF progressed since you first participated  in 2003?  A: Unfortunately, the WSF has a tendency to spin its own  wheels, so to speak, because of the inherent limits of its  slogan and motto — 'Another World is Possible', repeated  over and over, becomes discouraging because the shape of  that other world is never really spelled out. However, the fact remains that the WSF is the only place in  which to articulate a new reality, not just the possibility  of one.  Logically, we should be able to say that this 'other  world' is the world of Ecosocialism.  But due to the nature  of NGOs and their specialisation in certain crises, the WSF  has not yet sufficiently named the cause of the crisis as  capitalism — the forum must name the enemy and respond to  it. Q: Do you think Dakar offers the opportunity to do this?  A: Absolutely.  Africa is one of the most vulnerable places  on earth, which is bitterly ironic given that it is the  least industrialised part of the planet.  The continent  itself is more ravaged by the ruthless extraction of  resources than anywhere else — firstly because it has  resources and secondly because it lacks the protection to  stop the corporations from coming in.  So there is more  incentive in Africa to start thinking systemically. Dakar is also a centre of worldwide research in ecology,  much more so than Nairobi, Belam and even Mumbai.  The  general caliber of the left intellectual presence is  wonderfully high in Senegal.  Despite being such a huge  place, there are wonderful lines of communication between  the far-flung corners of the African continent — it is very  different from Asia and Europe in this respect. Q: How can the WSF meet the challenges of the World Economic  Forum occurring almost simultaneously?  A: It just has to be firmly grounded in an anti-capitalist  logic and practice.  It is hard but it's certainly possible.   I think above all else the Social Forum provides a place  where many, many tendencies can come and meet together under  the realisation that their separate troubles are not random  but systematic, and have to do with the penetration of  empire and global capital into every corner of the earth. To use a medical analogy, if you have a patient with a tumor  in her pancreas, it can only be dealt with once the doctors  can agree that it is a cancer.  They can then put their heads  together and come up with ways to cure it — and there are  many, many ways to cure it. 