Activists hope that a popular agitation against the setting up of a factory to  manufacture asbestos products in the eastern Bihar state will result in a  nationwide ban on the large-scale import into this country of the deadly mineral  fibre. Following six months of agitation against the setting up of the factory in the  Chainpur-Bishunpur area of Bihar’s Muzzaffarpur district, state chief minister  Nitish Kumar sought to lay blame on the central government for lack of  uniform laws on asbestos use across the country. 'This factory has received the environmental clearance from the government  of India.  But we (the state government) have not permitted its establishment  we have not given any permission.  As of now asbestos is not prohibited.  There  should be a uniform policy and asbestos factories stopped all over the  country,' Kumar said at a press conference in the national capital Feb.  2.    While construction at the Balmukund Cement and Roofings Ltd (BCRL) factory  has now been suspended, Kumar has not moved to ban asbestos factories in  his state. The Khet Bachao, Jeevan Bachao Jansangarsh (Save Land Save Lives)  Committee, which is leading the agitation in Muzzafarpur, wants both the  centre and the state to unequivocally cancel all approvals given to the BCRL.  While the central government India has banned the mining of asbestos, it  allows trade, manufacture and use of the mineral — despite resolutions by the  World Health Organisation (WHO) and the International Labour Organisation  calling for elimination of future use of asbestos.  According to WHO an estimated 90,000 people die of asbestos-related  illnesses every year.  Inhaling even small amounts of asbestos fibre or dust can result in a painful,  eventually fatal condition called mesothelioma, and lung cancer.  Most  patients, who are impoverished labourers, have little recourse to medical care.   Occupational health is grossly neglected in this country. 'Nitish Kumar’s philosophical appeal to begin a debate on production and use  of asbestos in India smacks of insincerity because he should be announcing  reforms in his industrial policy,' the anti-asbestos committee’s convenor,  Ram Chandra Rai, told IPS over phone.  'Our agitation will continue. ' 'Obviously Nitish Kumar is under pressure from industrial lobbies.  There is no  need for further debate on the dangers to human health from asbestos,’’ said  Gopal Krishna of the Ban Asbestos Network of India (BANI), which has been  supporting the agitation in Muzzaffarpur. India’s Supreme Court is currently hearing a public interest litigation asking  for a complete ban on asbestos, but has decided to leave it to Parliament to  bring in suitable legislation through the White Asbestos (Ban on Use and  Import) Bill that is pending since 2009.   At a hearing on Jan.  21 the apex court observed that the bill 'specifically  notes that the white asbestos is highly carcinogenic and it has been so  reported by the WHO.  In India, it is imported without any restriction while its  domestic use is not preferred by the exporting countries. 'The court noted that in 2007 Canada exported 95 percent of the white  (chrysotile) asbestos it mined, of which 43 percent was shipped to India.  'In  view of these facts, there is an urgent need for a total ban on the import and  use of white asbestos and promote the use of alternative materials,' the court  observed. Canada strictly regulates the use of asbestos under its Hazardous Products  Act and the Environmental Protection Act, but produced 180,000 tonnes of  the mineral in 2009 of which 96 percent was exported, according to the U. S.   Geological Survey. In India chrysotile asbestos - which is mixed with regular cement to produce  cheap roofing, drainpipes and false ceilings - can be freely imported.  But the  consequences to workers who handle such products are horrendous.  According to Sudhirendar Sharma, noted environmentalist and former  consultant to the World Bank, finely powdered asbestos has even been an  adulterant in perfumed talcum powder and as a whitener for the prized  basmati variety of rice. 'It is truly strange that the Canadian government knowingly exports a product  that has the potential to kill thousands of people in India and that the Indian  government continues allow its import,' Sharma said.  Sharma said that Canadian exporters and Indian importers were powerful  enough to get chrysotile excluded from the Rotterdam Convention (1994) on  the Prior Informed Consent Procedure for trade in hazardous chemicals and  pesticides.  'Without official patronage a product, banned in the European Union,  Australia and Japan cannot continue to be so easily imported into India,'  Sharma said.  'The fact that India slashed the import duty on asbestos from 78  percent in 1995 to 15 percent in 2004 speaks volumes. ' Last week, BANI issued a statement condemning the signing of a  memorandum of understanding on Dec.  31, 2010, between the Board of  Trade of Metropolitan Montreal and the Indian Merchants' Chamber on the  so-called safe use of asbestos, ahead of a trade mission to India.  'The signing of this agreement reveals the callous disregard of the Quebec- based asbestos mining companies and Indian asbestos product manufacturing  companies towards the health of Indians,' the statement said.  'We are concerned that the Jan.  30-Feb.  4 trade mission to India led by  Clement Gignac, Quebec’s economic development minister, included a  representative of Balcorp Ltd. , a major exporter,' Krishna said.  Balcorp is part of a consortium pushing to reopen the privately owned Jeffrey  Asbestos mines in Canada, one of the world’s largest open-pit asbestos  mining operations.  On Dec.  31, 2010, Turkey joined a growing list of over 55 countries that have  prohibited the mining, trade, manufacturing and use of asbestos of all kinds  in the interest of their citizens’ health.  'Indian policymakers must take care not to succumb to pressure from the  likes of Clément Godbout, president of the asbestos lobby group that includes  the Chrysotile Institute, Chrysotile Asbestos Products Manufacturers and  Asbestos Information Centre,' Krishna said.   