Pakistan is still reeling from flooding that caused one of the world’s costliest  natural disasters in 2010, with millions of people lacking shelter, infrastructure  in ruins and donations falling short of appeals.  But worse may come. The United Nations’ disaster coordination agency announced on Jan.  24 that  the Pakistan floods caused damages of at least 9. 5 billion dollars - the  world’s third costliest natural disaster in 2010 - and killed 1,985 people - the  fourth deadliest in a year of cataclysmic events. But Pakistanis will face a water challenge of a different sort in the years ahead  - the possibility of dire scarcity. 'There are so many other priorities that the government is facing, particularly  at a national security level, and to be frank, Pakistan’s government has never  really made genuine, sustainable commitments to human development and  human security issues, such as guaranteeing better access to water for the  masses,' says Michael Kugelman, an Asia analyst at the Woodrow Wilson  International Center in Washington. A Woodrow Wilson Center report titled ‘Running on Empty’ that Kugelman  oversaw in 2009 warned that Pakistan’s water situation is 'extremely  precarious' and that the South Asian nation could face widespread shortages  within 25 years.  He said last year’s floods exposed the government’s neglect  of infrastructure, including dams, 'one of the big manifestations of the water  management policy failures. ''I think you could argue quite conclusively that if repairs had been done in a  more timely fashion or more efficaciously in the last few years, that the  damage from the flood would not have been as extensive as it was,'  Kugelman told IPS. Aid officials say restoring water and sanitation services - already inadequate  before the inundations - remain a priority six months after torrential rains  turned the Indus River and its tributaries into destructive torrents.   Floodwaters raged from July through September, causing nearly 1 billion  dollars in damage to dams and irrigation systems and 93 million dollars  damage to water and sewerage facilities, according to relief agencies.  The  U. N. ’s humanitarian affairs agency says only 59 percent of the 1. 9 billion  dollars in immediate recovery aid has so far been provided. Lack of safe drinking water, stagnant pools and wrecked or non-existent  wastewater disposal are creating a health threat that is magnifying flood  recovery problems. The Red Cross and the South African anti-poverty group ActionAid have both  warned that waterlogged and silted croplands are threatening subsistence  farming and creating food shortages, and that malnourishment - particularly  among children and mothers - is growing. The Red Cross reported on Jan.  21 that four million people lack adequate  shelter, and contaminated water supplies in southern Pakistan are 'creating  breeding grounds for waterborne diseases. 'The U. S.  State Department said that more than a million children are at risk of  contracting infectious diseases, including waterborne ailments that were a  main cause of death among children before the 2010 inundations. Aside from urgent recovery needs, donors and analysts say Pakistan must  address its future water management practices if it is to serve its rapidly  growing population of 170 million. A flood damage report prepared by the Asian Development Bank (ADB) and  World Bank says the country’s water supply and sanitation services 'fail on  three accounts - quality, access, and sustainability of services. ''Piped water supply is frequently intermittent and not potable; only 35  percent of the population has access, at best for 3-6 hours a day in all but  the largest cities.  Sewerage services are inadequate with most households not  connected to a system; 33 percent of rural inhabitants have no toilet,' says  the 188-page report issued in December. Inadequate and neglected infrastructure is the legacy of Pakistan’s chaotic and  endemically corrupt politics, analysts say.  Efforts to take power away from  Islamabad and give regional governments more responsibility over water and  sanitation services have failed, the ADB/World Bank assessment says, because  local officials 'were not provided the skilled staff, management capacity and  systems, and operating budgets to do the job. 'Pakistan’s civilian authorities have not been aloof to the need for improved  water supplies and other infrastructure.  Two years ago, Prime Minister Syed  Yousaf Raza Gilani and U. N.  Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon inaugurated  Pakistan’s participation in a scheme aimed at streamlining foreign assistance  in areas of health, agriculture, rural development and disaster management. Local authorities also back ambitious dam-building projects - including two  on the Indus, the Kalabagh in Punjab and the Diamer Basha in Kashmir -  designed to prevent floods, generate electricity and provide stable water  supplies.  Gilani has told reporters that had the dams been in place before July  2010, the country might have been spared the worst flooding. But there are growing fears that the country is outstripping its ability to feed  itself, and overtaxed water supplies are likely to fuel conflicts between  competing agricultural and urban demands. Irrigation practices are primitive and account for 90 percent of the nation’s  water use.  According to the U. N. , Pakistan consumes 75 percent of its water  resources, compared to 34 percent for India. Meanwhile, the U. N.  estimates that the country’s population will double by  2050.  Urban areas accounted for 36 percent of the population in 2008, up  from 33 percent in 2000, with poverty forcing rural Pakistanis to seek greener  pastures in cities. Kugelman says more attention should be paid to urban water management to  avert health and resource problems.  'It’s not going to be that long from now  when the majority of the country lives in urban areas, and even now, the  government really cannot provide sufficient water supplies, clean water, and  water at all to the current populations in the cities. 'The report by Kugelman and his Woodrow Wilson Center associates warns that  Pakistan faces an imminent water crisis, with careless practices having a ripple  effect on food production. 'Intensive irrigation regimes and poor drainage practices have caused water  logging and soil salinity throughout Pakistan’s countryside.  As a result, vast  expanses of the nation’s rich agricultural lands are too wet or salty to yield  any meaningful harvests,' says the report. Kugelman sees the flood recovery as an opportunity for change.  Instead of  constructing expensive dams, 'doing more modest things like (investing) in  more high-efficiency irrigation technology that doesn’t waste as much water,  or just (trying) to fix up existing structures instead of building new ones. 'But much depends on the country’s leadership. Violence, displacement, a restless youth population, endemic corruption, the  conflict in neighbouring Afghanistan and creeping extremism - these  challenges would confound the most audacious statesman.  The Jan.  4  assassination of Salmaan Taseer, the Punjab state governor and prominent  secularist who was gunned down by his own bodyguard, symbolises the  country’s volatile condition. 'I think we’re seeing much more of a disturbing gain being made by those  that really do not support democracy,' Kugelman said.  'I still don’t think the  country is about to collapse, the military is too strong to allow that to happen.   But it’s pretty scary. '  