Several species of fish unique only to the waters of Kashmir are in danger of  extinction due to high levels of pollution, environmentalists say. Limnologist and professor A.  R.  Yousuf, a specialist in fresh water lakes and  rivers, says the excessive and unchecked use of pollution-causing herbicides,  pesticides and fertilizers of sub-standard quality dumped into Kashmir waters  is the main threat to the survival of these fish species. Yousuf’s list of endangered fish species includes the rama gurun (botia birdi),  once abundant and even caught in commercial quantities, which has now  almost disappeared.  Another is the algaad (Schzothorax niger), found only in Kashmir, whose  number has alarmingly lowered.  Other species, whose population is under  severe pressure include chhurn (S. esocinus), chosh (S. labiatus), khont  (S. plagiostomus) and sater gaad (S. curvifrons).  Experts like Yousuf are worried that the use of herbicides, pesticides and  fertilizers for agriculture and horticulture has picked up enormously in recent  years.   Yousuf said their experiments have revealed that the local fish species are  most sensitive to the pollutants.  'Their larvae or juveniles get poisoned by  these pollutants and die,' he added.  Kashmir’s Pollution Control Board (PCB) has been constantly warning the  government about the heavy environmental pollution in Kashmir valley and its  direct impact on the lakes and the River Jhelum, the major breeding ground of  native species of fish in Kashmir. A recent survey conducted by the PCB found that more than 40 million litres  of untreated liquid waste from Srinagar city alone, as well as 350 metric tons  of solid waste, get dumped into Kashmir’s bodies of water including the River  Jhelum and Dal Lake. The records of Kashmir’s Agriculture Department reveal that Kashmiri farmers  used 50,000 quintals of pesticides and herbicides in their farms in 2010.   'There is an annual increase of 20 percent in the consumption of these  substances,' says Assistant Director for Agriculture Ghulam Mohi-u-Din  Rather. Yousuf has come out with other conclusions as well.  'In the early 20th century  two exotic species, salmo trutta fario and oncorhynchus mykiss were  introduced in the River Jhelum and its tributaries to attract the anglers from  world over,' he told IPS.   'But the introduction of these species was not based on any scientific study  which would have assessed their compatibility with the native species. 'He says that both these trout species got established in the upper reaches of  the tributaries in the areas which served as the breeding grounds for the  native Schizothorax species.  'The result was the gradual dwindling of the native species as their eggs and  young ones became easy prey for the new entrants, both of which are typical  carnivorous organisms,' Yousuf said. He added that the accelerated deforestation over the last few decades and  significant quantities of eroded soil entering the upper reaches of the streams  caused the loss of native species’ breeding grounds. 'The exotic species did not suffer much on this account as their population in  the streams was regularly reinforced by the government agencies by releasing  fry and fingerlings raised in the farms.  The entry of raw domestic sewage into  Kashmir’s water bodies increased the problems for the native species  further,' Yousuf said. Yousuf also cited as a reason for the dwindling fish population the over- extraction of sand and gravel, where the native fish feed and breed.  Ismaeel Dar, a fisherman in Awantipora, told IPS that contractors have been  using heavy equipment to extract sand and gravel.  'This has snatched our  livelihoods from us,' he lamented.  'We used to earn 200 to 300 rupees (seven  dollars) a day, but now we hardly find any fish to catch. 'The rapid melting of glaciers in spring due to the impact of climate change is  also a factor in the decline of native fishes.  'At the time of spawning, during spring season, the streams are generally full  of water because of melting of snow and the broods of migrating fish try to go  as upstream as possible and lay eggs in shallow areas having sandy or  gravelly bottom,' he said. But the water recedes once the melting stops, causing shallow areas to dry  up, Yousuf said.  'The fingerlings of the fishes get trapped in pools of leftover  water and ultimately get perished after finding no access to the main stream,'  Yousuf said.  