Sri Lanka goes into a frenzy this month as it plays co-host to the 2011 Cricket  World Cup.  Conservationists hope the national pasttime will share national and  international media attention with an endangered Sri Lankan resident: the  elephant. After all, the World Cup’s mascot is Stumpy the Blue Elephant, who is likely to  find some real life friends as the games go rural, with some of the matches to  be played in grounds outside the capital Colombo. One such city is Hambantota, some 200 km southeast of the capital.  Here, the  newly built cricket stadium is just one of the region’s large projects, along  with a recently opened port.  Plans for a new airport, an extended rail track  and new highways are under way.   The rapid development in places like Hambantota has left the elephants with  a shrinking natural habitat, placing them in conflict with humans.  In 2009  alone, more than 220 elephants died in confrontation with humans; 50 people  are also estimated to have perished.  The Hambantota stadium stands in the heart of elephant country, and  illustrates how development fails to fully account for sustaining the elephant  population, says elephant conservationist Manori Gunawardena.  'Development needs to be inclusive of the wild life if it is to survive,'  Gunawardena told IPS.  'Relocating elephants into national parks or away from  areas of development is not the answer to this question. ' Relocations remain  suspended after a tusker died while being transported in late 2010. Gunawardena said plans should be in place to avoid the situation that arose  following the massive development programme in Sri Lanka’s central and  north-western regions in the 1980s.  That programme, prompted by the  Mahaweli Development Programme, had left the elephant population stranded  in shrinking jungles as new settlements grew around them.  'Mahaweli created a fragmented landscape without space for the animals to  move around,' she said.  Even three decades after the development programme began, the conflict  between humans and elephants continues, often unfolding like a cat-and- mouse game.  In Konweva, a village at the edge of the north-western Kurunegala District  some 170 km from the capital Colombo, elephants emerge from the jungle as  dusk falls and amble into the fields, crossing the road in front of a military  camp. In the village, located where the shrub jungle ends and the paddy fields  begin, 50-year-old farmer Immihami Mudiyanse and a young woman named  Shanika Ekenayaka kept watch, waiting for the elephants with this IPS  correspondent.  As twilight covered the grass field next to the road, a dark figure appeared  from within the trees.  'There, I told you, they will come,' Ekenayaka said.  As  the first elephant crossed the road and moved into the paddy field, another  appeared at the edge of the jungle.  'Another sleepless night,' the farmer said.  Conservationists say the situation in villages like Konweva is a result of the  animals’ traditional grazing grounds being divided and shrunk.  Now, there is  an attempt to change this.  A new 11-million-dollar pilot project funded by the World Bank is seeking to  change the manner elephant conservation has taken place thus far in Sri  Lanka.  'From conflict to human elephant coexistence, that is what we want to  do.  The fundamental change is to look at the problem from the animal’s side  as well,' Sumith Pilapitiya, lead environmental specialist at the World Bank,  said.  Nine new pilot projects are to be launched in mid-2011, five in the southern  provinces and four in the north-western provinces.  Pilapitiya told IPS that  project planning took into consideration years of research and, for the first  time, had the Wildlife Department and Forestry Department working together  on an elephant conservation project.  One of the major changes envisaged is in the placing of electric fences, used  extensively in Sri Lanka to deter elephant attacks.  The usual practice is to  place the fences on the boundary of the national parks or areas coming under  the Wildlife Department.  But the World Bank official told IPS that elephants were known to break the  fences in search of food in areas recently cultivated near the jungle.  Those  tracks often fall under the Forestry Department.  'The idea is to set up the fence on the ecological boundary depending on  elephant roaming patterns,' he said.  The new project also proposes a novel  approach to development taking place in close proximity to elephant habitat.   Pilapitiya said that the past practice was to set up electric fencing around the  new project.  'The elephants then are likely to move into nearby villages when food  becomes scarce,' he said.  'The new approach is to set up the fence around  the villages as well. '  Conservationists also want developers to bear the cost of protecting such  villages and conservation efforts rather than palming them off to the  government.  Both Gunawardena and Pilapitiya told IPS that human-elephant conflict was at  its worst where resettlement near elephant habitat had taken place in the last  50 years.  'Where indigenous people have lived for generations, we hardly see  such conflict,' Pilapitiya said.   Jayantha Jayewardene of the Asian Elephant Specialist Group, who carried out  extensive research among families who had lost members during elephant  attacks, found that most of deaths could have been avoided.  He found that  over 60 percent of deaths were due to drunken men acting foolishly brave  when confronted by an elephant.   'One shot from the elephant’s trunk and the man is dead.  If the villagers have  a knowledge of the elephants’ ways, they will learn to avoid the elephants at  night and also live in harmony with the elephants,' Jayewardena said.  The new World Bank project envisages creating such life-saving awareness  and will also try to create income opportunities for villages through elephant  safaris and tourism.  