Human-induced heating of the planet has already made rainfall  more intense, leading to more severe floods, researchers  announced Wednesday. Two new studies document significant impacts with just a  fraction of the heating yet to come from the burning of  fossil fuels.  Fortunately, another new report shows the  world can end its addiction to climate-wrecking fossil-fuel  energy by 2050. 'Warmer air contains more moisture and leads to more extreme  precipitation,' said Francis Zwiers of the University of  Victoria. Extreme precipitation and flooding over the entire northern  hemisphere increased by seven percent between 1951 and 1999  as a result of anthropogenic global warming.  That represents  a 'substantial change', Zwiers told IPS, and more than twice  the increase projected by climate modeling. Zwiers and Xuebin Zhang of Environment Canada used  observations from over 6,000 weather stations to measure the  impact of climate warming on the intensity of extreme  precipitation for the first time.  The study was published  Wednesday in the journal Nature. The planet is currently 0. 8 degrees C hotter from the  burning of fossil fuels.  However, global temperatures had  not yet started to increase in 1951, the first year of  rainfall data Zwiers and Xuebin examined.  By 1999, global  temperatures had climbed by about 0. 6 degrees C.  The average  temperature increase over that 50-year period is relatively  small compared to the present but major impacts have been  documented in terms of storm and flood damage even with this  small increase in temperatures.  This suggests that the Earth's climatic system may be more  sensitive to small temperature increases than previously  believed. The global costs of extreme weather events shot up from less  than five billion dollars a year during the 1950s to 45  billion dollars a year during the 1990s, according to Munich  Re, a major reinsurance company in Germany.  Not all of this  increase is due to climate change.  Some is due to population  and infrastructure growth and better disaster reporting.   However, the number of significant floods has tripled in the  past 30 years. Those costs came during a time when the planet was cooler  than present - a period of 'relatively weak anthropogenic  forcing', Zwiers said.  But as temperatures climbed, there  was a sharp increase in intense rainfall events during the  1990s, suggesting an acceleration in flooding and damaging  rainfall.  Zwiers said it is too soon to know if the 1990s  increase represents a new trend. Global temperatures are guaranteed to increase further from  today's 0. 8 degrees C to at least 1. 0 degree C by 2020.  This  will boost the amount of water vapour and heat in the  atmosphere, which are the fuel for even more and harder  rainfall events. Scientists have long known extreme events would increase  with a hotter planet but have maintained that a single flood  or storm could not be explicitly linked to climate change.   Now another study published Wednesday in Nature lays odds  they've found the 'smoking gun' behind Britain's severe  flooding in 2000. During the fall of 2000, the UK experienced some of its most  damaging floods and wettest weather since the first records  began in 1766.  Using the distributed computing power from  thousands of personal computers around the world,  researchers at Oxford University and others determined that  human emissions of greenhouse gases had more than doubled  the odds of the devastating 2000 flood. 'We simulated a parallel world in which there were no  greenhouse gas emissions,' said lead researcher Pardeep Pall  of Oxford University. Thousand of computer simulations were tested against reality  and the results revealed that climate change more than  doubled the odds of the 2000 flooding, Pall said at a press  conference. 'This study was 20 times more demanding than anything we're  tried before.  It is not easy to precisely say what caused  what when it comes to a single weather event,' added Myles  Allen of Oxford University. The UK Met Office is developing new methods for assessing  extreme weather events and determining the factors that  caused them in hopes of improving predictions.  In future,  the Met Office may be able to predict such events and  explain why they happened, said Allen. With human-induced heating of the planet expected by many to  reach at least 2. 4 degrees C in the coming decades, extreme  events of the recent past will seem very tame indeed.   However, this calamitous future can be avoided with a rapid  transition to a renewable global energy system. A detailed new study demonstrates that 95 percent of global  energy needs can be meet with renewables utilising today's  technologies alone. The Energy Report by Ecofys, a leading energy consulting  firm in the Netherlands, is the first to show that 95  percent of all energy can be renewable by 2050, while  offering comfortable lifestyles for a growing global  population and allowing a tripling of the global economy. 'We can do this by using and improving the technologies that  are already at hand,' said Manon Janssen, CEO of Ecofys.  'It  is a business opportunity, as much as it is a technological  challenge. 'Ecofys spent two years preparing the report in partnership  with the World Wildlife Fund. Paramount will be major increases in energy efficiency in  all sectors so that by 2050 energy use is 15 percent less  than the energy use in 2005.  And this is all possible with  existing technology, the report noted.  Emissions from  burning fossil fuels for energy will fall more than 80  percent by 2050, offering a real chance of keeping global  temperatures below 2 degrees C, the report said. While the transition will be costly, the savings from lower  energy use will amount to a five- to six-trillion-dollar  'windfall' for humanity by 2050. The move to renewable energy is already well underway in  places like California, where the cost of generating solar  energy is now as cheap as fossil fuels, said Justin Gerdes,  a California journalist specialising in energy issues. 'Renewables already benefit from lower upfront costs to  install - especially onshore wind - compared to huge one- gigawatt fossil fuel or nuclear plants,' Gerdes said.  'And,  then, of course, the renewables have no cost for fuel. 'And this is happening in the U. S. , where climate change is a  non-issue politically and there is no price or cap on carbon  emissions. 'In short, this can happen,' Gerdes said. 