As concerns mount about environmental degradation and rising  inequalities, many development experts and corporate  executives alike are asking whether a business as usual  attitude is sustainable in a world of increasingly scarce  natural resources. IPS spoke with Georg Kell, executive director of the U. N.   Global Compact, which is a platform for business and non- business bodies to collaboratively engage in the realms of  human rights, labour, environment and anti-corruption.  The Global Compact facilitates networking and dialogue  between corporations in the U. N. 's key areas of interest, to  reach the collective goal of building an environmentally  sound global economy. With a membership of over 8,000 entities covering 130  countries, Kell is confident that the Global Compact is well  placed to embark on key new initiatives to deal with recent  trends and challenges, particularly the burgeoning economies  in the global south and the unprecedented strain on natural  resources, in the coming decade.  Excerpts from the interview follow. Q: Since growth in developing countries will be much faster  than in developed countries this year, will the focus be  shifted to companies and corporations in the global south on  issues relating to corporate responsibility and the prudent  use of scarce resources? Will this be the beginning of a new  trend?  A: Many recent advances in corporate sustainability and much  of what is considered best practice in a variety of areas is  driven by companies from emerging economies.  There are  several reasons for that.  First off, many of these companies  have been operating in very complex and difficult operating  environments for decades, often learning the hard way how  easily instability, poverty, corruption or environmental  degradation can disrupt economies and threaten business  growth. So, for many of these companies it has been a struggle on  both ends: they had to learn very quickly how to be  competitive on the global markets while still bridging gaps  in their own backyard.  As a consequence, this has helped  create very robust and versatile global organizations that  are well-positioned to take the lead on sustainability  issues. An illustrative example of this Southern leadership role is  our work with global stock exchanges.  From Kuala Lumpur to  Shanghai, Istanbul, Johannesburg or Sao Paulo — many of the  emerging-market exchanges are far more advanced in their  integration of long-term sustainability issues than their  Northern counterparts, who are often still chasing volume  and short-term gain. Q: What role do you expect multinational corporations to  play in global economic development in 2011? And, in this  context, where do you see the need for corporate social  responsibility?  A: Multinationals often sit on top of global supply chains  of enormous proportions, with millions of employees across  the globe.  For better or worse, their decision can have  significant impacts on well-being of markets and societies  alike.  Adoption of responsible labour practices or  introduction of low-carbon technologies across these vast  supply chains can have tremendous ripple effects. In fact, in some areas corporations can drive change often  faster than regulators, due to the relative immediacy of  their decision-making.  For instance, Wal-Mart's decisions to  actively promote use of energy-saving light bulbs or to sell  more organic produce not only impact consumption patterns,  but also have significant consequences for producers. There are many areas where responsible business is critical  to long-term success.  On climate change, future efforts to  curb greenhouse gas emissions will depend much on the  ability of business to bring existing innovation to true  scale.  Poverty can only be tackled if more businesses  realise the potential of pro-poor business models and bring  their competencies and strengths to bear in partnership with  the U. N.  and civil society. At the same time, we need a greater sense of transparency  and accountability, especially in the lobbying arena.  It is  highly troubling to see how some corporations undermine  their own commitments to greater sustainability through  direct and indirect lobbying activities. Q: Do you feel that the outcomes of the recently-concluded  World Economic Forum in Davos were satisfactory? Why or why  not?  A: It is important to understand that the World Economic  Forum is not a decision-making body, but merely a forum to  discuss global political and economic trends at a very high  level.  This year's Forum confirmed that emerging markets  continue to go strong.  It has also shown that cautious  optimism has set in, even though the world economy continues  to move at vastly different speeds.  There appears to be a  keen sense of the uncertainties and risks that lie ahead of  us, from natural resource constraints to climate change. From the Global Compact's perspective, we were extremely  happy to launch Global Compact LEAD, our new platform to  take environmental, social and governance performance to the  next level and set a new benchmark for corporate  sustainability.  More than 50 companies have joined LEAD and  made a commitment to become true sustainability leaders. We are also very happy to be among the founding partners of  WindMade, the first global consumer label identifying use of  wind energy by business.  WindMade was introduced to a global  audience in Davos and is a direct response to increasing  consumer demands for more sustainable products. Q: Several of your partner organisations have been accused  of violating social responsible practices.  Can you respond  to this charge?  A: No company in the Global Compact is perfect.  And we have  made it very clear from the very beginning that we remain  open to those that face serious challenges, as long as they  make a sincere commitment to transparency and  accountability. I believe strongly in the power of constructive dialogue and  learning as our best hope to stimulate continuous  performance improvement in these organisations.  That is not  to say that we don't have any recourse to further action in  cases of egregious violations.  But we prefer active  engagement over punishment. Q: How does the global compact office (GCO) hold its  partners accountable for violations of corporate social  responsibiliy? Can you give some examples of violations, and  the GCOs response?  A: A few years ago, we introduced what we call a dialogue  facilitation mechanism that is intended to stimulate debate  and produce collaborative solutions.  It is rather  unspectacular, as we don't talk about individual cases, but  it has helped to defuse tensions and bring people and  organisations together in a more constructive spirit. The number of cases brought before is surprisingly small,  compared to the total number of companies in the Global  Compact.  Most cases have revolved around labour issues and  related human rights concerns and our first step is always  to connect the two sides.  We cannot stress often enough that  the Global Compact was never intended to be a regulatory  body, and we are not a substitute for effective regulation. While we are actively engaging companies that face serious  challenges, we demand that they remain committed to  transparency and accountability.  That is the reason why we  have expelled more than 2,000 companies for repeated failure  to communicate on progress made in implementing the Global  Compact's principles. 