Growth-obsessed markets and governments are pillaging the  planet and it must stop, a new U. N.  report warns. The present 'brown' economic system driven by fossil fuel  energy and the serial depletion and degradation of natural  resources and ecosystems has no future and must be replaced  by a green economy, says the Green Economy report launched  in Nairobi, Kenya this week by the United Nations  Environment Programme (UNEP). Investing just two percent of the global economy into a few  key sectors will kick-start a transition towards a low- carbon, resource-efficient economy, the report says.  With  that relatively small investment, many of the world's  biggest challenges - climate change, poverty, hunger, jobs,  sanitation, energy, food - could be successfully met within  two generations. 'The Green Economy provides a vital part of the answer of  how to keep humanity's ecological footprint within planetary  boundaries,' said Achim Steiner, UNEP executive director. 'It aims to link the environmental imperatives for changing  course to economic and social outcomes,' Steiner said. The report documents that a green, low-carbon, resource- efficient economy will be at least as prosperous as the old  brown economy.  Better still, a green economy will not have  the inherent risks, shocks, scarcities and crises of the  resource-depleting, high carbon 'brown' economy, it says. 'A green economy is not about stifling growth and  prosperity, it is about reconnecting with what is real  wealth; re-investing in rather than just mining natural  capital; and favouring the many over the few,' says Pavan  Sukhdev, an economist on secondment from Deutsche Bank and  head of UNEP's Green Economy Initiative. The first step on the road to a green economy is to phase  out the over 600 billion dollars in global fossil fuel  subsidies and 're-direct the more than 20-billion-dollar  subsidies [that] perversely reward those involved in  unsustainable fisheries', said  Sukhdev. 'Misallocation of capital is at the centre of the world's  current dilemmas and there are fast actions that can be  taken starting literally today,' he said in a statement. The fact that the world spends between one and two percent  of global GDP subsidising unsustainable resource use puts a  lie to the oft-cited claim that environmental investments  come at a cost to economic growth.  Industrial agriculture is  another example of a heavily subsidised sector that  contributes up to one-third of all greenhouse gas emissions  and has other massive environmental side effects. Moreover, industrial agriculture has failed to properly feed  up to a billion people a year for decades, says the  International Federation of Organic Agriculture Movements  (IFOAM). That clear failure and the environmental destruction it has  caused is a clarion call for a shift to agro-ecological  practices as recommended by the International Assessment of  Agricultural Knowledge, Science and Technology for  Development (IAASTD).  Those practices have been endorsed by  UNEP, the FAO, World Bank and over 50 countries, according  to an IFOAM statement made on behalf of farmer  organisations. Putting agro-eco practices into place will require  governments to shift their subsidies and policies to support  small food producers and their efforts to nurture the  majority of the world's ecosystems and biodiversity. The 'Towards a Green Economy' report acknowledges some jobs  in the brown economy will be lost.  However, new jobs will be  created, green jobs that are both better for people and the  environment.   The report defines the green economy as 'one  that results in improved human well-being and social equity,  while significantly reducing environmental risks and  ecological scarcities'. 'I am pleased to read that UNEP shares with workers around  the world the deep belief that a green economy should work  for the people and the planet, and not just for GDP growth  and a few wealthy companies,' said Sharan Burrow of the  International Trade Union Confederation, a labour  organisation representing 176 million workers in 151  countries and territories. 'The policies being pursued by governments at the moment  risk taking us backwards.  Neo-liberal recipes, based on the  dictates of the financial markets, have to be jettisoned,'  Burrow said in a statement. To create a truly green economy requires governments to take  back their responsibilities to regulate banking and finance,  and promote policies which stimulate greening of workplaces  and creation of new green jobs, she said. Green is the best way for Europe to re-energise its  faltering economy, according to a major new report released  in Brussels this week by the German Environment Ministry.  A  massive burst of investment in green technologies aimed at  reducing greenhouse gas emissions by 30 percent by 2020 will  not only be good for the global climate it will bring wide  economic benefits to the 27 countries of the European Union. 'European governments must not ignore evidence that moving  to a 30 percent target is in Europe's own economic  interests, when the lives of millions of poor people,  already hit by climate change, are on the line,' said Tim  Gore, Oxfam's climate change policy spokesman. Enormous inertia and resistance will have to be overcome to  make the shift from brown to green.  Governments will have to  become 'green activists' to make it happen, experts  acknowledge.  It is up to each country to act, says UNEP spokesperson Nick  Nuttall.  Taxation and smart market mechanisms that shift  consumer spending and promote green innovation will be  needed.  Policies that favour renewable energy and government  spending that stimulates green economic sectors and limits  spending that deplete natural capital will be among the  changes needed. Relying on markets and investors to power the shift to green  economy is unlikely to work, says Christine von Weizsäcker,  representing civil society at the UNEP meetings in Nairobi  where the report was released.  Governments will have to be  active in directing the shift by enforcing rules and  practices like the precautionary principle protecting human  rights, said Weizsäcker, a biologist with ECOROPA, a German  NGO. 'Stopping perverse subsidies certainly should be one of the  core issues of the green economy,' she said. 