In less than two decades, all of the world's coral reefs will  be threatened if global climate change and local pressures  like overfishing and pollution remain unaddressed,  disproportionately impacting the livelihoods of some of the  world's most impoverished people, a report warned Wednesday. '[T]hreats to reefs not only endanger ecosystems and  species, but also directly threaten the communities and  nations that depend upon them,' stated the 114-page  publication, called 'Reefs at Risk Revisited', which was  released by the Washington-based World Resources Institute  and a coalition of over 25 likeminded organisations. According to the report, most of the inhabited areas in  close proximity to coral reefs are located in developing  countries, while many communities that depend on these reefs  for food and work are in poverty. 'The people at greatest risk are those who depend heavily on  threatened reefs, and who have limited capacity to adapt to  the loss of the valuable resources and service reefs  provide,' said co-author Allison Perry, project scientist at  the World Fish Centre, in a statement Wednesday. According to WRI, over 275 million people live within 30  kilometres of reefs, which protect 150,000 kilometres of  shoreline in more than 100 countries and territories.  In 23  of these, reef-associated tourism accounts for over 15  percent of the nation's GDP.  And 19 of the 27 nations most  vulnerable to reef degradation and its consequences are  Least Developed Countries.  (See sidebar for the nine most  vulnerable nations. )'From the fisherman in Indonesia or Tanzania who relies on  local fish to feed his family, to the scientist in Panama  who investigates the medicinal potential of reef-compounds,  reefs provide jobs, livelihoods, food, shelter and  protection for coastal communities and the shorelines along  which they live,' wrote former United States Vice President  and prominent environmentalist Al Gore in the report's  foreword. Currently, 75 percent of the world's coral reefs are at risk  — a category that includes those that appear to be in good  health but could soon be spoiled, those that are already  degraded and those that are already 'lost', Mark Spalding,  president of the Ocean Foundation and co-author of the  report, explained in an interview with the Nature  Conservancy on Wednesday. Local threats — such as unsustainable fishing, irresponsible  coastal development and watershed- and marine-based  pollution — currently threaten 60 percent of coral reefs.   Meanwhile, warmer seas and carbon dioxide pollution from  global greenhouse gas emissions lead to weakened reefs due  to coral bleaching and stunted growth due to increased ocean  acidity, the report states. By 2030, if these unbridled pressures continue, over 90  percent of the world's reefs will be at risk, it predicts;  by 2050, all of these ecosystems will be threatened.  As a  result, their development and the diversity of species  residing in them will be severely hampered, negatively  affecting the peoples and economies that depend on them. At stake are such benefits as reef tourism and the jobs  associated with it; reef-derived medicine and research for  malaria, cancer, HIV and other diseases; food security —  reefs are a major protein source for many local communities;  and shoreline protection from storms and natural disasters,  lead author and senior associate of WRI Lauretta Burke  explained at the publication's launch. Noting significant variability across regions — depending  on, say, remoteness to large population centres or intensity  of overall tourism — some estimates value reef-associated  tourism worldwide at 1. 2 billion to 25. 0 billion dollars  annually. Southeast Asia, which the WRI says 'is home to the most  extensive and diverse coral reefs in the world', is the  region whose reefs are most at risk, with a coastal  population higher than that of every other region combined.   Australia, with the greatest abundance of reefs — most of  which are within designated protected areas — is the region  least threatened.  (See sidebar for regional comparison of  risk. )The report advocates for a multi-faceted approach to address  the risks to reefs.  These include mitigating threats at the  local level — like reducing unsustainable fishing and  pollution and checking irresponsible coastal development —  and at the global level — such as through expanding  designated areas of protection and reducing carbon dioxide  emissions. But it also argues for the need to reduce coastal  populations' reliance on coral reefs — potentially through  social and economic development — at least partially in  order to help protect their livelihoods from the negative  consequences of reef degradation. 'For highly vulnerable nations — including many island  nations — there is a pressing need for development efforts  to reduce dependence on reefs and build adaptive capacity,  in addition to protecting reefs from threats,' Perry said. 'Recognising the needs of reef-dependent communities within  [national development] efforts may bring opportunities for  reducing their vulnerability to future reef loss, as well as  identifying the role that sustainable use of reef resources  can play in poverty reduction and economic development,' the  report states. In their recommendations, the authors also stress the  importance of involving the local populace in decision- making processes and resource management. 'Activities such as agriculture, aquaculture, tourism, or  trade may represent viable [alternative livelihoods], but  will only be sustainable where their development takes into  account local aspirations, needs, perceptions and cultural  ties to coral reefs,' the report argues.  'For millions of  reef-dependent people, it is critical that such efforts  succeed. '