In an era of mass consumption in the West, the developing  world is entering its second major hunger crisis in three  years, with new figures from the World Bank showing food price  hikes have forced 44 million people into economic hardship  since last June. More than one billion people, a sixth of the world's  population, now face chronic hunger and the situation is  likely to worsen this year, with experts such as David  Nabarro, coordinator of the U. N.  Secretary-General's High- Level Task Force on the Global Food Security Crisis, warning  food prices are on an 'upward trend'. 'Somewhere in the region of two billion households are  earning less than two dollars per day and spending somewhere  around three quarters of their income on food,' Geneva-based  Nabarro told reporters in New York via video-link on Friday.  'And now they are having to pay 15 percent more than they  were this time last year for their basic foods, and their  elasticity to cope with that increase is very limited  indeed,' he said. The Food and Agriculture Organisation's (FAO) Food Price  Index (FFPI) also rose for the seventh consecutive month in  January, averaging 231 points, up 3. 4 percent from December  2010. Nabarro said a mix of factors were influencing the price  hikes, including political instability in some nations,  increased crop failures stemming from climate change and La  Niña-related weather events, and 'serious' underinvestment  in agriculture. And although he admitted investor speculation in food  commodity markets could also be an underlying factor, he  said the U. N.  would not give 'policy prescriptions' on how  to regulate the sector. 'There's no doubt speculation is having a role; the degree  to which it is actually triggering shifts in prices we don't  know,' Nabarro said.  'But we understand it's a significant  role in the magnitude of price changes.  To that extent it's  going to be for governments to seek to find ways to address  this question. ''What concerns us is the volatility of prices…they're moving  up and down quickly — sometimes without clear links to the  fundamentals of market supply and demand — and this makes it really hard for farmers and others in the  food chain to make decisions about when and how to increase  production. 'International NGOs have long called for tighter regulation  on speculation of food prices, arguing that financial houses  in Chicago, New York and London are gambling on hunger. French President Nicolas Sarkozy also voiced concerns about  the issue, accusing food speculators of 'extortion and  pillaging'. With mounting global concern, France's minister of  agriculture, Bruno Le Maire announced last week that a  meeting on the topic would be held between the agriculture  ministers of the G20 countries in Paris in June. Here in the United States, some are placing hope in the  sweeping changes instigated by the Dodd-Frank Wall Street  Reform and Consumer Protection Act, introduced last year in  the wake of the global financial crisis, to improve  transparency in the financial sector. However, organisations such as California-based Food First  Institute for Food and Development Policy say tighter  regulation will not work. Its executive director, Eric Holt-Gimenez, told IPS price  speculation in agricultural markets should be banned. 'The first step is to take agriculture out of the WTO (World  Trade Organisation) it doesn't belong there,' he said. 'The second step is to prohibit financial speculation in  (food) commodities - prohibit it, you can't regulate it,  prohibit it - and then countries have to be allowed to  protect their food systems.  They need to be allowed their  own food sovereignty. 'Then we need to reinvest in agriculture, give farmers fair  prices for their product,' he added. Holt-Gimenez said the recent food price hikes were not  connected to normal supply and demand forces, blaming  speculation and hoarding. 'It's not a problem of supply and demand.  If you look at  FAO's figures over the past 10 years you can see there is  absolutely no relationship between the supply and demand  prices.  And we get very high prices sometimes when we have  more than enough supply. 'With poverty and food prices among the key drivers of  protests erupting across the Middle East and northern  Africa, the issue of food security continues to pose serious  challenges for both developed and developing nations. Highlighting the recent revolutions in Egypt and Tunisia,  Holt-Gimenez said we could expect to see more political  unrest if the hunger crisis was not addressed properly. 'This is global struggle for food sovereignty against the  monopolisation of our food system and it's going to be very  painful and probably going to be an extended struggle with  very uneven results worldwide,' he told IPS. 'What we're already seeing is profound political  consequences for governments around the world, including in  the global north. '