Producing quality Arabica coffee beans on the slopes of Mount Elgon in eastern  Uganda is only viable once farmers are assured ready access to the global  market.  Fair trade has made this possible. Rural communities in eastern Uganda have gained much-vaunted access to  the global market by supplying coffee to Cafédirect, a British company in  which founders, growers and employees alike own shares.  And coffee  consumers thousands of miles away benefit by enjoying organically cultivated  coffee.  Taking a bumpy road, IPS visited farmers in Bukalasi sub-county in Bududa  district, about 275 km east of the capital Kampala.  Stanley Nasasa, 63, has worked almost his entire life as a coffee farmer but  feels he is only now enjoying real benefits.  The reason: fair trade.  Nasasa is secretary of the Bukalasi cooperative society.  The society is a  member of the Gumutindo coffee cooperative, or grower organisation, that  works with Cafédirect to ensure ready market access and better prices for the  Arabica coffee farmers of the area.  Gumutindo means 'excellent coffee' in the  vernacular Lugisu. Getting prices on which livelihoods can be sustained is of uppermost  importance to farmers as that allows them to build houses, educate their  children and transform communities.  At Nasasa’s home IPS discovered why he has become a fair-trade crusader.   His family had just moved into a newly built brick-walled house with a cement  floor after living in a mud and tin-roofed house in a mudslide-prone area.  'I bought this piece of land for three million shillings (1,300 dollars) and the  house has so far cost me 10 million shillings (5,000 dollars).  These are the  fruits of fair trade under Gumutindo,' he told IPS.  Flanked by his wife Stella, Nasasa said the money came from savings after  receiving good fair-trade prices and 'social premiums'.  Gumutindo pays a social premium with each kilogramme of coffee that is  produced, which comes in the form of a bonus that farmers can use for  support projects that are also aimed at people not engaged in coffee  production. Nasasa told IPS that, 'the fair-trade arrangement has saved us from predatory  coffee dealers who give farmers far less than the market price of coffee.  We  have come a long way, I tell you.  'There was a time when we would carry coffee all the way to Chebukube  market in Kenya.  It was not easy because some people lost their lives. ' He  was referring to the coffee-smuggling days of the 1970s during dictator Idi  Amin’s reign.  Amin’s policies caused an economic meltdown that affected the marketing of  coffee.  Farmers stored coffee in their houses because of lack of markets.  They  had to trek through the mountains to neighbouring Kenya to sell their coffee  in order to survive.  Nasasa said the new house is a relief to his wife who always had difficulty  climbing the hilly area where their original house was located.  'Life is better  here.  We lived in fear after several people near to where we stayed were killed  by mudslides last March (2010). ' Behind the house is a barn with two Friesian cows producing milk for the  family.  There are three raised stands with wire mesh in the compound.  The  stands are used to ensure a clean space for the drying of the Arabica coffee  beans.  Inside Nasasa’s house one big room has been reserved for storing and drying  coffee.  He squatted, showing IPS very white coffee beans in his hands while  smiling: 'This one is surely AA grade, the highest quality according to  Gumutindo standards,' he remarked.   About 50 m from the Nasasa home lives Wilson Mabala, another Gumutindo  supplier.  Asked about the benefits of supplying coffee under fair trade rules,  Mabala replied that, 'since we joined Gumutindo we have maintained our  lands using organic manure.  We are getting a good price for our coffee. 'I have personally benefited a lot.  With the better earnings, I have sent my  children to better schools than I could afford in the past,' he added.  Primary education in Uganda is free of charge but many parents concerned  about the quality of education opt to take their children to private schools  where they foot the bill.  Mabala told IPS that he spends over one million  shillings (500 dollars) per year on school for two of his children. A short walk farther IPS came across a project where the Bukalasi cooperative  society stores are being expanded to create more storage facilities for coffee.  Mabala, who is also chairperson of Bukalasi cooperative society, told IPS that  the stores’ expansion is financed with social premium receipts.  'The farmers sat and decided that we should expand the store so as to create  more room for the storage of coffee.  You cannot have ‘gumutindo’ (excellent  coffee) when you store it badly,' he explained.  Behind the store, IPS found Sera Nafungo tilling a garden where coffee has  been planted with beans and yams.  Nafungo, who has four children, remarked  that fair trade has taught farmers to preserve their soil using organic manure.   'We get free coffee seedlings and have been taught how to prevent pests and  keep the nutrients in the soil,' she enthused.  'I have managed to buy some Friesian cows and now have a constant supply  of milk at home, some of which is sold,' she added. Mabala told IPS that other farmers in the area have witnessed the benefits of  fair trade farming and were eager to join.  'We hope to expand our  membership but we are doing it systematically.  A new member must be  taught about quality requirements before we can admit him or her,' he  insisted.  According to Cafédirect’s website, the company is the result of 'Oxfam, Equal  Exchange, Traidcraft, and Twin Trading’s decision to bypass the conventional  market and buy coffee direct from disadvantaged growers in developing  countries'.  Over a period of five years, it had paid growers more than 13,4 million dollars  over and above market prices for raw materials.  