The U. S.  Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) has begun the  initial stages of a process that may lead to the federal  agency's first regulations to limit emissions of carbon  dioxide from power plants and oil refineries. The agency has held four of five 'listening sessions',  including one attended by IPS in Atlanta, Georgia, on Feb.   15.  The EPA also held a meeting with electric power industry  representatives in Washington, DC, on Feb.  4; a meeting with  state and tribal representatives on in Chicago, Illinois, on  Feb.  17; and a meeting with coalition group representatives  in Washington earlier Thursday. The EPA will hold a fifth hearing for petroleum refinery  industry representatives in Washington on Mar.  4, and is  also accepting written comments from the public through Mar.   18. 'In December, [EPA administrator] Lisa Jackson committed to  set standards for two carbon dioxide most-polluting  industries, the electricity and utility sector, and the  petroleum and refining sector,' Gina McCarthy, assistant  administrator at the EPA's Office of Air and Radiation, said  at the Feb.  15 meeting. 'But before beginning to set standards, she wanted to hear  from the public. . .  especially the environmental justice  communities,' McCarthy said, referring to grassroots groups  that defend the rights of low-income communities and  communities of colour, where polluting plants and factories  have often been located. The EPA is pursuing these standards under the New Source  Performance Standards (NSPS) programme and under the  authority of the Clean Air Act, which McCarthy called 'our  most flexible tool in the toolbox'. After years of inaction by the U. S.  Congress, which is  debating whether to pursue even a weak, market-based policy  of carbon emission credits trading, Jackson made the  stunning announcement in December 2009 that the agency would  look at regulating carbon dioxide under the existing powers  already granted to the agency under the Clean Air Act. This followed the landmark 2007 court ruling in  Massachusetts v.  EPA that carbon dioxide can be defined as a  pollutant.  This definition has allowed the agency to pursue  regulating carbon dioxide under the Clean Air Act. Shortly after President Barack Obama took office, the EPA  also issued an important ruling that global warming is a  threat to public health and safety, which laid the  groundwork for the current process. Leaders of environmental and environmental justice  organisations, as well as members of the public, spoke at  the Feb.  15 hearing. 'What about the core mission of the EPA?' Nicky Sheats,  member of the New Jersey Environmental Justice Alliance,  asked.  'How are the standards going to protect the public  health of communities and residents?'Sheats argued the EPA should also regulate existing coal  plants, not only new ones. 'We support EPA's authority and decisions to protect low- income people,' said Seandra Rawls of the Southern Alliance  for Clean Energy.  'There are 90 coal plants in the Southeast  [U. S. ]. . .  emitting 350 million tonnes of carbon dioxide  every year.  We need to retire old facilities.  We must  require a limit by a certain date. ''The southeast is more vulnerable to the impact of climate  change,' Rawls said, citing coastlines, sea level rise,  erosion, storms, and drought. 'Power plants in [poor] communities should be covered under  the standard.  NSPS is greater than cap and trade.  NSPS is  far and away from cap and trade.  We want to keep it that  way,' said Sharonda Williams, environmental policy and  advocacy coordinator for WE ACT for Environmental Justice. While carbon dioxide is naturally occurring - we exhale it  when we breathe, for example - its production in mass  quantities by transportation and fossil fuel power plants is  not natural. 'There is symbiosis, harmony, and balance in the natural  order.  Today we're out of balance.  There were once 90  million acres of long leaf pine forests [in the Southeast]  but now there are three million.  In Georgia in 1936, there  were four million acres and now there are only 376,000  acres,' said John Hammond, regional executive director of  the National Wildlife Federation. 'We in the faith-based community are concerned with the  mind, the body, and the spirit,' added Rev.  Gerald Durley of  Providence Missionary Baptist Church and Georgia Interfaith  Power and Light. 'We are not only concerned with spiritual well-being but  physical well-being.  If we're not concerned about the planet  we'll be too dead and all of us will be gone.  Products may  cost more, but which is more important? God or Allah created  a perfectly balanced world and we're destroying it,' Durley  said. The EPA anticipates making actual recommendations by July  2011 for power plants and December 2011 for refineries.  The  agency will issue final standards in May 2012 and November  2012, respectively. EPA officials say they are also in the process of addressing  other pollutants, including mercury and particle pollution,  in separate, coordinated actions. Yet even as the consequences mount of global climate change  such as melting of the polar ice caps, the EPA is facing  retribution from the new Republican-led House of  Representatives for daring to take action. Congress is considering cutting the agency's funding, among  other measures. Republicans have introduced bills this session which would  block the EPA from cutting carbon dioxide emissions from  coal-fired power plants, overturn the EPA's recent  endangerment finding that global warming threatens public  health, block states from setting their own standards,  and/or exclude greenhouse gases from the Clean Air Act. 