Beer manufacturers sell nearly 548 million litres of brew each day, but with every  bottle, they are using many times that amount of water on a planet facing  mounting resource challenges. Mindful of the impact on fragile freshwater sources in an industry heavily  dependent on water, brewers are pledging significant cuts in freshwater use  as the demand for their products grows.  They are also forging alliances with  conservation groups and international organisations to urge other industries  to follow their example. 'The business world is waking up to water in a way that they haven’t before,'  Stuart Orr, freshwater manager of the environmental group WWF International,  told a conference in Brussels Thursday.  'From now and into the future, our  lives are going to be determined by increased water scarcity. ' IPS and the  Global Compact Network of Belgium organised the conference through the  sponsorship of Anheuser-Busch InBev. Prompted by dwindling freshwater reserves and pollution, the beverage  industry has been particularly active in forming associations and setting  corporate polices aimed at cutting water use, Orr said.  'Risks are something  companies understand,' he said.  'One thing we all agree on is, we have to be  cooperative on water. 'The major global brands as well as less known breweries and spirit makers  vow to streamline consumption amid warnings that many regions, particularly  in the southern hemisphere, face serious droughts and dire freshwater  scarcity in the decades ahead. Belgian-based Anheuser-Busch InBev, with 130 production plants worldwide,  plans to cut water use per bottle of beer from 5. 5 to 3. 5 litres by next year.   Other leading companies, such as SAB Miller and Heineken, have made similar  commitments, while bottled water and soft drink manufactures, including  Danone, Coca Cola Co.  and Pepsico, have also pledged to reduce water use  through better maintenance, water-reduction technologies and water reuse. Industry officials attending the Brussels conference, Solutions for Sustainable  Water Use, say conservation is a practical matter because their manufacturing  depends on water as an ingredient and for industrial uses such as heating and  cleaning.  More efficient resource use is also good business - it cuts operating  costs.  The conservation moves also help fulfil their commitments through  industry and intergovernmental partnerships like the United Nations’ Global  Compact on the environment, human rights and anti-corruption initiatives. But the efforts alone are not likely to reverse a worsening drain on freshwater  supplies around the globe. European Commission officials warn of widespread water shortages as the  global population hits 9 billion by 2050, as expected, and if conservation  measures are not taken.  'We will need the resources of two-and-a-half  planet earths,' Karl Falkenberg, director-general of the commission’s  environment office, told the water conference. 'The way in which we are going about our business, the way we as consumers  are conducting our lives is not going to be sustainable in the next 40 years,'  he said.  'We should all think about this, particularly here in Europe, where we  flush out toilets with drinking-quality water. 'Farmers are the biggest water consumers in many countries, according to the  United Nations.  Kevin Shepherd, an engineer at Wells and Young’s in Bedford,  UK, says the family-owned brewing company is working with its grain  suppliers to improve irrigation practices.  Finding the right balance between human needs and nature will require broad  social involvement - private as well as public - according to those attending  the water conference. 'We need to strengthen relationships between companies, government and  others to protect water supplies,' said Mario Lubetkin, director-general of the  Inter Press Service, the global news agency.  Lubetkin urged more corporate  social responsibility and stewardship of water resources, noting that industrial  involvement is 'still relatively rare. 'Globally, more than 700 million people live in areas where there is water  scarcity, and that figure is expected to grow to 3 billion by 2035, according to  the World Bank.  The United Nations estimates that some 900 million people  lack safe drinking water, despite a decade-long push by donors to improve  water access in impoverished nations.  In Asia, the shortfall between water  supplies and demand is expected to be 40 percent within 20 years. The UN’s Human Development Report, released in November last year, says  some 1. 75 billion people - or 25 percent of humans - experience  'multidimensional poverty' including water deprivation or living without  adequate sanitation. Meanwhile, researchers say Pakistan, a nation still struggling to recover from  epochal flooding in 2010, faces widespread freshwater shortages within two  decades.  Anti-government protests in Egypt, Jordan and other Middle Eastern  nations were sparked in part by public frustration over unequal distribution of  natural resources between the ruling elites and masses. Egyptians, Jordanians and Palestinians among the most water-deprived  people in the world, according to Maarten A.  Siebel, associate professor at  the UNESCO-IHE Institute for Water Education in the Netherlands.  The per  capita water consumption among Palestinians in the West Bank is 50 cubic  metres per year, one-sixth of the rate in Israel, Siebel said in an interview.   