A growing number of endangered olive ridley sea turtles have been getting killed  in Eastern India’s coastal state Orissa by mechanized vessels defying a fishing  ban on one of the world’s largest turtle sanctuaries, Gahirmatha. While the government said 'no more than 800' were killed since November  last year, environmentalists counter that the casualty count of these tiny  turtles is actually 5,000. The problem illustrates the situation that confronts Orissa and other coastal  states in India.   Environmental and wildlife protection is a major concern, but  so is providing sustainable livelihood to the coastal poor.  Add to the mix  shore-based infrastructure and industrial development and the result is a  three-cornered tussle that is worsening by the year.  'We are all for the safety of turtles but the interests of the fishermen must  also be kept in mind,' said Narayan Haldar, president of the Orissa Traditional  Fish Workers’ Union, summing up the predicament the state faces.  At least 40 percent of Orissa’s 480-kilometre coastline is off limits to  fishermen from November to June.  There is the seven-month fishing ban that  is a part of measures to conserve Orissa’s marine sanctuaries.  And then there  is an additional two months when fishermen are warned against venturing out  to sea because of recurring low-pressure systems on the adjacent Bay of  Bengal.  'These areas are seeing a drastic reduction in income, large-scale out- migration, clashes over fishing zones, and even suicides,' said Trilochan Das,  another fisher group’s leader. 'As fishermen thus sit twiddling their thumbs nine months in every year,  cheaper freshwater- cultured fish from the neighbouring state of Andhra  Pradesh has overtaken Orissa’s fish market,' Haldar lamented.  'The  government must rationalize the annual seven-month fishing ban in a vast  area of the sea and offer alternative livelihood options to the fishing  community. 'This knotted issue confronting fishers and the fisheries administration as well  as environmentalists and developers is now being addressed.  The Federal Ministry of Forest and Environment recently initiated an Integrated  Coastal Zone Management Project (ICZMP) funded by the World Bank and  being pilot-tested in four areas since June 2010. These four pilots, one at the national level and one each for the three States  of Orissa, Gujarat and West Bengal, are designed to address the intensifying  three-cornered coastal tussle, a challenge further exacerbated by frequent  natural disasters and climate-induced risks.  The pilot lessons here would be  used for future ICZMPs in other coastal states in India. While environmental issues, improvement of livelihoods and protection of  coastal communities are ICZMP’s priority, 'de rigueur is community  participation in all decision making processes; mainstreaming gender, poverty  and equity, too, are top of the list,' said Ajit Kumar Pattnaik, Project Director  of Orissa’s ICZMP. The total project cost is 286 million dollars or 1330 crore rupees.  Of this  amount, 49 million dollars are concentrated on two reaches of Paradip- Dhamra and Gopalpur-Chilka, which constitute 14 percent of Orissa’s  coastline.  More than half of the State’s disadvantaged or ‘dalit’ caste population resides  in the 641 marine fishing villages along Orissa’s coast.  Sixty of these villages  will benefit from the pilot project. The selected coastal areas are richest in ecological and economic resources  and have been the most vulnerable to exploitation.  While Chilka Lake is one of  the largest brackish water lakes in the world, Bhitarkanika, which houses the  Gahirmatha wildlife sanctuary, is the second largest mangrove ecosystem in  Asia. Allied fish farming activities like crab fattening, sea bass or composite fish  culture, scampi or fresh-water prawn culture are being promoted in the 60  villages as alternative livelihoods to make fishers less dependent on fishing.   These activities are also aimed at reducing fishing pressure on the  beleaguered ecosystems. To replace the traditional making of salted and dried preserved fish that used  to be the exclusive preserve of fishers’ womenfolk, the programme provides  hygienic fish drying yards to women self-help groups.  Diary and goat rearing  are other alternate livelihoods.  Women self-help group leader Satyabhama Das, who is 60 years old,  participated in an earlier regional stakeholders consultation and expressed  reservations, saying, 'Such fishers groups formed earlier were not supported  properly.  No real protection was provided against crocodiles, and the really  needy people should be supported, not those with local clout. '  The  Bhitarkanika mangrove area is a crocodile habitat. Integrating heritage and eco-tourism with rural community livelihood is yet  another option already taking shape.  Four of the 14 multi-purpose cyclone shelters that ICZMP will build will be  located in Puri district.  The shelters will provide safety to men, livestock and  basic assets during disasters, and will be used as nodal points for  coordinating rescue and relief operations post-disaster. The ICZM addresses the key environment and social challenge that Orissa,  Gujarat and West Bengal currently face - the loss of biodiversity and marine  ecosystems as more coastal land is diverted for major industries and  development infrastructure like ports, harbours and jetties.   Lately, the shortsighted construction of upstream hydrological structures for  irrigation and industrial water supply in Orissa has choked fresh water flow  crucial to maintaining the required salinity for mangroves’ survival. Coastal fragility is further exacerbated by increasingly destructive and  exhaustive fishing practices.  As coastal population and infrastructure grow,  impacts of natural disasters such as cyclones, storms and floods take a  costlier toll.  The worst of these was the killer cyclone in 1999 that cost Orissa  ten thousand lives. Till now, governments have sought to deal with the situation through  regulations, which clearly are inadequate and lack convergence between  departments working towards similar goals.  ICZM is structured to integrate  various agencies, not just target communities, in its formulation and  implementation.  In Orissa, for example, government arms working on the common ICZM  platform include fisheries, water resources, archaeology, culture and tourism,  and the wild life wing.  Also included are the State disaster management  authority, coir co-operatives, State pollution control board and the  municipality of Paradeep, Orissa’s coastal industry hub.   