In the northwestern Icelandic town of Isafjordur, milk is causing pandemonium.   A local milk marketing board recently tested one farm’s milk for the presence of  harmful chemicals.  Dioxin, and dioxin-like compounds, were found to be  present in amounts higher than the recommended maximum levels, threatening  the future of local farmers, and angering residents. Dioxins are highly toxic compounds produced as a byproduct in some  manufacturing processes, notably herbicide production and paper bleaching.   They are a serious and persistent environmental pollutant. The milk that was tested came from a farm called Efri-Engidalur, located in a  valley only 1. 5 kilometres from a waste-burning incinerator that was closed  by the authorities last year due to consistently high levels of pollutants.  'Usually, measurements are done by the authorities, but we decided to test for  dioxin because we were concerned about the incinerator,' said Einar  Sigurdsson, of MS Iceland Dairies.  As a result of the findings, the Icelandic Food and Veterinary Authority (IFVA)  decided to test samples of milk, meat, and hay from several farms in the  surrounding area. The findings revealed increased levels of dioxin and dioxin-like compounds in  the majority of the samples.  Dioxin-like compounds are polychlorinated  biphenyls, commonly known as dioxin-like PCBs, which behave like dioxin, so  are generally classified with it in terms of toxicity. In 2007, the Environment Agency of Iceland (EAI) measured emissions from  waste incinerators.  According to regulations of the European Commission, the  executive arm of the European Union, maximum emission levels of dioxin  should not exceed 0. 1 ng/m3.  'The emission levels are measured per cubic metre in the exhaust from the  incinerator rather than total emissions.  As a result, an incinerator that burns  more waste but has a lower emission measurement can emit more dioxin,'  explains Sigridur Kristjansdottir from the EAI. However, in 2007, emission levels in Isafjordur were 21 times the maximum  EC regulation level. In addition, concern has arisen in the small town of Kirkjubaejarklaustur, in  South Iceland, where dioxin levels were recorded at 95 times the maximum  exposure level in 2007.  And in Vestmannaeyjar, an island just off South  Iceland, the dioxin level was 84 times the maximum exposure standard.  In all three cases, the results were sent to the Ministry for the Environment  but were not released publicly.  In Kirkjubaejarklaustur, the waste incinerator is located in the same complex  as the local school, sports centre, swimming pool, and music school.  The  original plan had been to use the waste heat from the incinerator to heat the  surrounding buildings.    When the dioxin level was revealed, local residents became angry and  demanded that the plant not operate while children were at school.  One  parent, civil engineer Oddur Bjarni Thorarensen, took his children out of the  school. But, according to Kristjansdottir from the EAI, 'in the environmental impact  assessment for the plant, the pollution dispersal forecast indicated that  maximum pollution levels would be expected to occur at a distance of about  150 metres from the plant (relative to open areas). ' 'This assessment was one of the items produced to justify that pollution levels  would not be expected to be high in the immediate vicinity of the  incinerator,' says Kristjansdottir. The Infectious Disease Control division of the Directorate of Health has  decided to monitor residents of Isafjordur, Kirkjubaejarklaustur, and  Vestmannaeyjar for the presence of dioxin.  'It is possible to scan for possible dioxin by testing hair for lead.  A positive  test indicates that dioxin may be present,' says Gudrun Sigmundsdottir, head  of the department.  Steingrimur Jonsson, the farmer from Efri-Engidalur, says that no one has  come yet to take samples from him.  He and his family have regularly been  consuming milk and meat from their 20 cows and 80 sheep.  'But since dioxin was found in the milk, we have stopped eating our  produce,' he said. Dioxin is an accumulative toxin and is not considered to be particularly toxic  to humans unless a lot of produce containing it is consumed — as could well  be the case for farmers, who tend to eat a lot of home-produced food. But, if dioxin levels were too high in 2007 at three plants, when did the dioxin  pollution begin? And what will this mean for the future of Iceland’s livestock  industry?'They can tell how long the pollution has been going on by taking soil  samples, which they have done.  But it’s a slow process,' says Jonsson.  He sees no future for livestock in his area.  'Not if the milk and meat cannot  be sold,' he told IPS. Last year, 384 sheep were slaughtered near Isafjordur.  These yielded about  6. 5 tonnes of meat, of which almost five tonnes were sold overseas to the UK  and Spain.  Because the meat had not been tested for dioxin, all of the lamb  has since been recalled as a precautionary measure. Ironically, in the lead-up to the 1992 Rio conference on Agenda 21, it was  Iceland that originally suggested that international controls be implemented  to measure the release of persistent organic pollutants (POPS), including  dioxin, and their impact on the environment. But, as secretary general of the environment ministry Magnus Johannesson  told IPS, 'there was little enthusiasm for this on the international level. ' The POPS Convention was eventually agreed in Stockholm in 2001, while  regulation on the release of pollutants from waste-burning incinerators began  in the EC in 2003.  Operators of incinerators were given five years to conform  to the new regulations.  However, 'because the four waste-burning incinerators that were operating  according to old licences had so little throughput, the EC agreed that these  plants did not have to improve their technology while they were operating,'  says Johannesson.   The four plants include the now-closed incinerator near Isafjordur, the plants  at Kirkjubaejarklaustur and Vestmannaeyjar, and a plant at Svinafell that was  not measured for dioxin in 2007.  The latter is used mostly in summer for  burning tourist waste.  