After years of stiff resistance, the Japanese government has announced a  temporary halt to its controversial research whaling programme in the Antarctic  Ocean, a decision that will finally stir the debate to promote sustainable fishing,  say conservationists here. 'We welcome the decision to halt whaling this season as a step towards  preserving whales which are an endangered species.  The message is that  whales have to be protected which is all the more valuable since it comes  from a nation that is a leader in the consumption of seafood stocks,' Junichi  Sato, expert on whaling at Greenpeace Japan told IPS. Since 1982, the world has followed global moratorium against commercial  whaling by the International Whaling Commission (IWC) but only Japan was  allocated an annual quota for scientific whaling that is aimed at determining  available stocks. Greenpeace International spearheads a global campaign against Japanese  whaling that has led to bitter clashes and lawsuits against each other. Several fisheries experts express support for the unprecedented move by the  Japanese government, pointing out it is a vital landmark in dealing with the  growing consumption of fish in the world that has lead to alarming depletion  of stocks. 'The decision to call back the Japanese whaling fleet is based on low whale  meat consumption locally, and other evidence that shows the industry is not  sustainable,' Prof.  Toshio Katsura, marine biologist at Mie University told IPS. Katsura has long called on the government to develop a visionary policy  where fishing management based on quotas for fishers are seriously enforced  in a bid to protect marine species.  Despite campaigns to increase the sale of whale meat from minke whales, the  local market has reported a reduction of 30 percent in 2010, according to the  Tokyo-based Minato Newspaper quoting the publicly funded whaling  company Koyodo Senpaku. Whale meat is popular among older consumers in the sixties and above whose  diet soon after World War II relied on whale as a protein.  But a 2008 September survey conducted by an independent organization  under a request by Greenpeace Japan conservationists indicates that 70  percent of people between the ages of 15 to 39 years have not eaten whale  meat.  The Japanese media has reported that 4,000 tonnes of excess whale meat was  frozen and stored in warehouses in 2009.      But, in sharp contrast to the mood displayed by conservationists, the  announcement on Feb.  17 by Fisheries Minister Michiko Kano on the change  of policy expressed no firm commitment to sustainable fishing practices.  Indeed, Kano avoided the word sustainability and instead cited 'safety  concerns for Japanese whalers' from harassment by the Sea Shepherd  Conservation Society that has blocked the Japanese ships from whaling. The Japanese fleet Nishinmaru comprising five ships left for the Antarctica  last December and harpooned 170 minke whales and two fin whales before it  was called back.  The catch is below the Japanese quota of 850 minke whales  and 50 fin whales approved by the IWC for research purposes.  The government cites whale populations to justify this level of whaling for  research.  It says the minke whale population is estimated to have grown to  more than 100,000 in the Atlantic and over 660,000 in the Southern  Hemisphere. Minke, a medium sized whale, is reported to be the fastest growing species,  and so research whaling is legitimate, according to the Japanese Fisheries  Agency.  Japan justifies research whaling as necessary to protect its  indigenous cuisine that has included whale meat since the 12th century. Prof.  Masayuki Komatsu at the National Graduate Institute of Policy Studies, a  think tank, who served as a former negotiator for the government at the IWC,  is critical of the new move. 'Calling back the Japanese whalers to protect them from irresponsible and  violent activists smacks of diplomatic weakness.  This is not the way to go,' he  told IPS. The conservationists insist the new move to curtail whaling is a powerful  boost to their long call on the Japanese government to manage dwindling  marine resources around the world. Toshiaki Fujita, local governmental official at the Niigata prefecture located on  the northwest coast of country is currently putting the finishing touches to a  landmark programme where fishermen will participate in sustainable catches  of sweet shrimp, a Japanese delicacy. Speaking to IPS, Fujita says the new step to regulate fishing is aimed at  cultivating a sustainable management system that will gain the support of  Japanese fishermen to share a quota in catches. 'As the catches of sweet shrimp became smaller in size, the stark reality of  reducing catches and preserving stocks became obvious to the fishing  industry.  This is why they are now willing to participate in this management  experiment,' he said. Niigata is the third largest resource in Japan for sweet shrimp providing 600  tonnes annually.  Only ten out of a hundred fishing companies have voluntary  joined the programme, but Fujita says the group represents the largest  shrimp companies in the area. Biologist Katsura who launched the Niigata project, heralds the step as a  groundbreaking start in Japan where the government ' stubbornly refuses to  fund such moves which are crucial for sustainable fishing. ''Government focus is on maintaining the supply of fish and much money is  spent on farm-harvested technology as the solution.  This is not the answer in  the long run as fish farms depend on feed from the oceans. '  