Picture a mother, hunching over a field with a Medieval-style  hoe in hand, spending day after day tilling the soil under a  beating hot sun - only to retire home to care for her family  without electricity or running water. This is not a 12th century image, but a typical working day  for scores of rural women in today's developing world, where  lack of access to education and technology has forced many  to resort to traditional and often painful methods of  livelihood. Abject poverty is, of course, one of the key causes, but  there are also tangible and achievable ways of addressing  realities such as these, according to African activists at  this week's Commission on the Status of Women in New York. Women in Law and Development in Africa (WILDAF), a pan- African network bringing together individuals and  organisations from 23 countries, is among the key regional  groups tackling this issue head on. WILDAF believes lack of knowledge about education rights,  specifically among young girls, is one of the main reasons  forcing rural people to endure lives of agricultural  hardship. Adaeze Agu, a New York-based Nigerian, is using education to  empower young people in Ghana and Nigeria, as a volunteer  with HIV advocacy group World Mission. One of the charity's key projects involves teaching  students, most of whom have lost parents to HIV/AIDS,  agricultural techniques after school, with lessons involving  everything from improving existing farming methods to modern  packaging for export. 'The new generation of children learn technology faster, and  when they learn they teach their mothers,' Agu told IPS. 'We want to teach them how to develop projects, from tilling  the ground to seeding, all the way through to packaging at  an international level so the food will be accepted by  everybody in other countries,' she said. Agu cited a project where female farmers of moringa — a  nutritious African plant — were able to increase the  efficiency and ease of production, through simple modern  conveniences. With help from World Mission, the women were given access to  a van to transport their leaves to the city markets to be  processed — rather than relying on irregular public buses —  which saved time and increased the number of useable  harvests. Agu said the charity was also looking to raise money to  invest in a specialised 'leaf drying' machine, which would  allow a cooperative of female farmers to transition from  traditional sun-drying methods. Bisi Olateru-Olagbegi, executive director of the Women's  Consortium of Nigeria (WOCON) and board member of WILDAF,  said educating girls with both formal and practical  education was key to addressing the gender imbalances and  breaking the cycle of poverty. 'When a women is empowered and she can assert her rights in  the community she can rise up to any position and be part of  decision making and raise the status of women,' Olateru- Olagbegi said. Although enrolment levels have risen in many developing  countries since 2000, UNICEF estimated there were still more  than 100 million children out of school in 2008, 52 percent  of them girls and the majority living in sub-Saharan Africa. As a result, illiteracy is high, mainly in rural areas where  five to seven women over 10 years old can neither read nor  write. Olateru-Olagbegi said while some areas were progressing with  gender equality, the 'traditional and patriarchal practices'  in many African regions were proving slow to change. '[It has been thought] women are not supposed to be seen in  public, they're supposed to be in the kitchen,' she said.   'But over the years this has been proved wrong, that it's  not effective because both girls and boys need to be  educated for us to have meaningful development. 'Social activists have made great progress in Africa in  recent years, fighting for women's rights to work and  education. Subsequently there has been a measurable increase in girls  attending school, a trend that has led to fewer early  marriages and teenage pregnancies as well as a reduction in  the number of youths who are trafficked and prostituted. In spite of the gains, however, girls are still largely  underrepresented in the science and technology fields. 'Even when girls go to school there is a bias that girls are  not supposed to learn science and technology; they're still  doing the social sciences and humanities,' Olateru-Olagbegi  said.  'They don't think that the faculties of girls are  developed enough and it's mere discrimination. 'This is not just a problem in Africa.  At this week's CSW,  representatives from European nations gathered to discuss  the ongoing imbalance of women in the region's science and  technology industries, focusing on opportunities in the  emerging green jobs sector. Kira Appel, Denmark's minister for gender equality, said  correcting the imbalance would not only empower women, but  strengthen the economies of progressive nations. 'A recent study in the Nordic countries proved that if you  improve the gender balance within companies the innovation  rate will double,' Appel said.  'We need women, for the sake  of gender equality and women's empowerment, but also for the  sake of the global brain race. 'Olateru-Olagbegi told IPS that in Africa, addressing the  current inequalities in schooling was a matter of convincing  mothers that daughters were worth educating.  'We're educating the parents, particularly the mothers who  are the first educators, to teach them that they should have  gender balance in education and training for the children,'  she said.  'So they don't allow the boys to go and play  football while the girls stay in the kitchen. '