Wildebeests have the Serengeti, and tiny krill the sea ice.   But in the upside-down world of the Antarctic Peninsula, one  of the biggest shows on earth would pass unheeded except for  the work of a band of polar scientists seeking clues to what  changes in temperatures and sea ice levels mean to wildlife. Much of the action takes place on the margins of the  continent, where the effects of rising temperatures on the  advance and retreat of sea ice are becoming more pronounced  and coming at a rate faster than previously anticipated - in  a region of the world once considered far too immense for  humans to change.  The Antarctic Peninsula is thawing out. Dr.  Maria Varnet, a research biologist at the Scripps  Institution of Oceanography, has built a career in  Antarctica, returning to the Palmer Research Station since  1988.  As part of the Long-Term Ecological Research  programme, she and a multidisciplinary team of scientists is  unlocking the mysteries of the polar ecosystems. Her focus as of late has been krill-algae interactions.  Tiny  shrimp-like crustaceans, krill reach maturity in a temporary  zone at various times part water, part ice and part slush,  which demarcates the watery realm between the permanent ice  shelf and the open ocean.  It is thought to be the cradle of  Antarctica's food chain.  Krill are a key food source for predators.  Their abundance  or lack of it trickles up and down the food chain.  'Everyone  eats the krill - the fish, the whales, the penguins,' Venert  told IPS. Young krill require sea ice in order to thrive.  The larvae  gather in the sea ice to eat algae accumulating in the  crevices and to evade predators.  'If you don't have any ice,  you don't have any growth,' she said.  The Antarctic Peninsula is thought to have had better sea  ice years with greater consistency in the prior decades.   Since 1950, sea ice cover has dropped by 40 percent, and the  average annual period of ice cover has shrunk by 90 days.   'Good' ice years are occurring with less frequency.  'Timing is everything,' said Vernet, although factors such  as prevailing winds, sunlight and ocean currents also have  an important role to play in the formation of sea ice.   Winter temperatures on the Antarctic Peninsula have  increased five degrees C.  over the past 70 years, much  higher than other regions on the continent where  temperatures have remained stable.  The loss of sea ice along the western edge of the peninsula  can be correlated to a decline in krill and algae, which is  the basis of the food chain.  Whether the loss of sea ice can  be attributed to natural seasonal variations or blamed on  human-induced climate change is unclear.  However, a warming  trend is underway, said Vernet. Different regions are responding differently to warming  temperatures.  Studies suggest that the declining sea ice is  resulting in greater ocean mixing - a complex set of  interactions ranging from prevailing winds and the tides  down to the molecular level that affects salinity and the  regulation of water temperature.  One hypothesis is that  without sea ice, algae drifts further the down the water  column into darker water, reducing the ability to  photosynthesise.  Another factor in the equation - the increased intensity of  polar winds - is changing the seasonal cycle of sea ice.  The  sea ice is arriving late in the winter season and retreating  earlier. 'The observation is that with global warming those winds  have increased.  The wind has changed the seasonality of the  sea ice,' said Dr.  Sharon Stammerjohn, a sea ice specialist  at the University of California at Santa Cruz. Data shows that huge green-hued algae blooms are no longer  appearing on satellite images off the western peninsula.   Images from the last 30 years reveal an 89 percent decline  in phytoplankton in the northern part of the peninsula, but  a 66 percent increase in the south.  There was a 12 percent  decline in phytoplankton, a trend that concerns scientists.  The shortfalls have impacts up and down the food system from  penguins that feast on krill to whales that subsist on  plankton.  Activists also contend that the increasing  commercial exploitation of krill is impacting the ecosystem.   Krill are harvested to produce feedstock for aquaculture and  marketed as Omega 3s in popular diet supplements. This, along with declining sea ice, threatens Antarctic  regions where commercial fishing overlaps with the feeding  grounds of seal, penguins, and whales. 'We don't live in the Antarctic, but it's a harbinger of  climate change everywhere,' Stammerjohn told IPS.  