A first-of-its-kind lawsuit alleging gross negligence and  fraud has been filed in a Florida state court against Kenneth  Feinberg, the administrator of the 20-billion-dollar  compensation fund for victims of BP's Gulf oil spill, and the  Gulf Coast Claims Facility (GCCF). Attorney Brian Donovan of the Donovan Law Group from Tampa  filed the complaint against Feinberg, his firm Feinberg  Rozen, LLP and the GCCF on behalf of Pinellas Marine  Salvage, Inc.  and John Mavrogiannis.  The complaint alleges, in part, gross negligence, fraud,  fraudulent inducement and unjust enrichment on the part of  the defendants. 'Feinberg and the GCCF have done more damage than the oil  spill,' Donovan told IPS.  'My client has relied on what  Feinberg said he would do.  They've made promises they didn't  keep.  John's company was promised money they have not  received. 'Mavrogiannis told IPS, 'We're sick and tired of this  runaround.  I'm tired of Feinberg's lies.  He's made promises  he hasn't kept.  He's manipulating the system and that's not  right. 'Mavrogiannis is far from alone in not having received  compensation for the severe losses his business has suffered  as a direct result of BP's oil disaster in the Gulf of  Mexico that began last April. It was recently revealed that more than 130,000 compensation  claims will be refused by Feinberg, who claims they lack  adequate documentation. State governments of Florida, Alabama, Mississippi and  Louisiana are accusing Feinberg of delaying claims and  causing great hardship to local businesses, as well as  underestimating losses to coastal businesses. Donovan believes Feinberg is simply doing what he is being  paid by BP to do. 'He's doing his job,' Donovan told IPS, 'Feinberg is a  defence attorney representing BP.  To think otherwise is  being foolish.  As a defence attorney, he's doing a great job  for BP.  But they are saying 'go with us, or sue us'. 'Feinberg's Washington-based firm, Feinberg Rozen, was being  paid 850,000 dollars a month by BP to administer the  compensation fund and claims process for Gulf residents and  fishermen.  A 46-page contract between BP and Feinberg detailing the  arrangement was made public on Jan.  7 when it was filed in  the U. S.  District Court in New Orleans as part of the multi- district spill litigation against BP.  As of Jan.  15, the firm's fee, according to the document,  will be 'mutually agreed to by the parties on a quarterly  basis in advance of the first day of each successive  calendar quarter. ' This clause has led many critics to  believe that Feinberg could stand to gain from dispensing  less of the fund's 20 billion dollars to claimants and tying  the amount of its payments to Feinberg's success in limiting  BP's liability. Any funds remaining from the 20 billion would revert to BP  under an agreement with the White House.  Feinberg has told  reporters, 'My understanding is that if 20 billion dollars  is sufficient and there is money left over it is retained by  BP. 'In late December, Feinberg told Bloomberg Television that he  anticipates about half of the fund should be enough to cover  claims for economic losses. Donovan believes lawsuits haven't been filed against  Feinberg before now 'because of politics'.  'His political connections is all I can think of.  I can't  think of why more people won't go after Feinberg for this,  because it's obvious they should,' he said. 'The only attorneys involved in the BP oil spill who I know  are those trying to sign up victims for class action  lawsuits,' Donovan added.  'This is understandable given that  Reuters recently reported that fewer than three percent of  the approximately 470,000 businesses and individuals who  have filed claims with GCCF have lawyers helping them  negotiate. 'Mavrogiannis feels their complaint is solid, 'Because  Feinberg has lied to us on several occasions.  Had he told me  from the beginning he was working for BP, I would have filed  suit against BP right when this happened.  I believed he was  impartial with no ties, but he has deceived me, and that's  fraud. ''If I lose my property, business, and house because I can't  make my mortgage payments because Feinberg is late in paying  me, who is going to compensate me for this?' Mavrogiannis,  whose home is close to being forclosed, told IPS.  'I have to  take my IRA's out to pay my bills.  I can only hang in there  for another month or two then the banks are going to want  their money. 'Mavrogiannis' lawsuit alleges, in part, 'The defendants  employ a 'Delay, Deny, Defend' strategy against claimants.   This strategy, commonly used by unscrupulous insurance  companies, is as follows: Delay payment, starve claimant,  and then offer the economically and emotionally-stressed  claimant a miniscule percent of all damages to which the  claimant is entitled.  If the financially ruined claimant  rejects the settlement offer, he or she may sue. 'The amount paid out so far averages nearly 16,000 dollars  per claimant.  According to the U. S.  Department of Health and  Human Services, the 2009 poverty threshold for a family of  three was 18,310 dollars. 