Powerful fossil energy interests are preventing the United  States from making the necessary transition to 21st century  energy sources, one of the country's leading environmental  economists documents in a just-published book. Fossil energy interests are spending 'hundreds of millions  of dollars' lobbying U. S.  politicians in Congress and  funding groups to confuse the public about the serious risks  climate change poses, says Robert Repetto, author of  'America's Climate Problem: The Way Forward' published by  Earthscan. IPS climate and environment correspondent Stephen Leahy  spoke with Repetto about his new book. Q: Why did you write this book?  A: We're running out of time.  The latest science shows that  climate change is coming faster and posing greater risks  than previously thought.  We are at risk of triggering  positive feedbacks that will lead to uncontrollable climate  change. Meanwhile, America is locked in a climate-policy stalemate,  with very few in the public comprehending the real risks  climate change poses.  Most don't understand that climate  change is happening now.  They don't link extreme weather  events we've been experiencing with climate change.  As a  result they are not demanding that politicians take action. Q: Why don't most Americans understand the fact that climate  change is already underway and poses serious risks?  A: Fossil (oil, coal, natural gas) energy interests are  pouring hundreds of millions of dollars into sowing doubt  and uncertainty to blunt public concern and to provide  political cover to those politicians they are funding.  In  America, there is a very concerted effort by fossil energy  interests that bankroll right-wing and libertarian 'think  tanks' like the Competitive Enterprise Institute to create  an atmosphere of doubt and uncertainty, just like the  tobacco companies did regarding the health effects of  smoking. Q: You write that the U. S.  Congress's failure to address  climate change - 'the most serious environmental problem in  history' - reflects the larger failure of an American  democracy corrupted by money: 'Not only can political  support be bought, it can be bought cheaply. . . . '  A: Studies have shown that political spending by  corporations has the highest potential return on investment  for companies and organisations with interests affected by  congressional action.  Senator James Inhofe [a Republican  from Oklahoma], a powerful and longstanding opponent to  action on climate change, received 768,000 dollars in  contributions from fossil energy and mining interests during  the 110th Congress. Fossil energy interests are fighting to preserve their  markets.  What else can you do with coal except burn it?  Railways also make a lot of money off shipping coal. Q: Why do people elect representatives who do not represent  their interests?  A: The public is not really aware of what happens in  Washington.  They've become disengaged from the political  process and there is wide spread discontent with  politicians.  People feel their representatives are not  acting in the public interest, and they're right.  Changing  this is not easy. During elections, incumbent senators and representatives  outspend challengers three to one and they end up being re- elected term and after term.  A senator's election campaign  will spend upwards of five million dollars to get re- elected. Q: The Obama administration has said climate change  represents 'a clear and present danger' but has taken little  action in its two years in office.  What can the  administration do when House of Representatives recently  voted to eliminate all funding for the Intergovernmental  Panel on Climate Change?  A: It is highly unlikely there will be a U. S.  climate bill.   However, if the Obama administration chooses to act, they  could do a great deal on the regulatory side.  Enforcement of  environmental rules regarding coal mining was incredibly lax  under the [George W. ] Bush administration and the costs of  the environmental damage off loaded onto the American  public. Tougher regulations and tighter enforcement would make coal  a less attractive energy source than alternative energy  options.  The public is strongly supportive of environmental  protection. Q: Opponents of action on climate claim it will hurt jobs  and the economy.   A: That's a false claim.  Every reputable economic analysis  has shown the opposite.  Switching to green energy sources  will mean more jobs and a healthier economy.  People should  question why large corporations that don't hesitate to raise  prices or lay off their workers are so concerned about job  protection and price stability that they fund think tanks  and other organisations to make false claims about climate  legislation. Q:  You argue that America's future depends on a transition  to new forms of energy.  Can you explain?  A: The basic technology of our cars is over a century old,  our coal-powered electricity system older still.  Once much  of our energy came from water mills that were replaced 50  years later by steam power, to be later replaced by  electrical power.   During each transition, there were  prophets of doom claiming it would be too risky, too  dangerous to change.  We have not experienced an energy transition in our  lifetimes but we must move to the green energy of the 21st  century - renewables and major increases in energy  efficiency.  Europe has over 800 offshore wind projects, the  U. S.  has none.  We are being left behind.  We need to  accelerate the transition to green energy. 