The first in a new series of 11 dams planned across the Mekong, South-east  Asia’s largest river, could break a special bond between two communist-ruled  countries. Critics in Vietnam see red over a 1,260-megawatt hydropower project  planned by their smaller, poorer, land-locked neighbour, Laos.  They call it an  environmental disaster.  Laos, however, wants to be the powerhouse of the region — to sell power to its  neighbours and earn enough to help the poor, that is a third of its population  of 5. 8 million. The dam in an idyllic hill setting in the north Laos province of Xayaburi (or  Sayaboury), will be built by a Thai developer.  Thailand is expected to buy 95  percent of its power to fuel its booming economy. Environmentalists say the Xayaburi dam and 10 more such constructions  planned on the Mekong’s mainstream, nine in Laos, make a Faustian bargain.  The dam will 'reduce fresh water and silt downstream in Vietnam and  devastate fishing among others,' stated ‘Tuoi Tre’, the country’s largest  circulating paper, published by the Communist Youth Organisation from Ho  Chi Minh City (former Saigon) in the south. The potential threat of the 3. 5 billion dollar dam in the Mekong delta,  Vietnam’s 'biggest rice producing and fish farming area', has been  highlighted by The Saigon Times too. Vietnam’s government officials have raised their voice against the 32-metre- tall, 820-metre-wide dam.  'If built, Laos’ Xayaburi dam will greatly affect  Vietnam’s agriculture production and aquaculture,' deputy minister of natural  resources and environment Nguyen Thai Lai reportedly said in a meeting of  the country’s Mekong River experts. Such criticism goes against the spirit of a 1977 treaty of friendship and  cooperation that binds them in a ‘special relationship’.  The treaty followed  the communist triumph against the U. S.  in the Vietnam War. Towards the end of the Cold War conflict from 1954 to 1975 the communist  North Vietnam defeated and annexed the U. S.  supported South Vietnam.  The  protracted conflict left a long trail of death and destruction in the former  French Indochina territory that includes Laos and Cambodia. 'The criticism reflects the concerns and the opinion of the public and the  government,' said Nguy Thi Khanh, deputy director of the Centre for Water  Resources Conservation and Development, an NGO based in the northern  Vietnam city of Hanoi.  Vietnamese scientists have also said 'the project should be stopped,' Khanh  added during a telephone interview from the Vietnamese capital.  'Vietnam’s  silence about this dam has been broken. 'For its part, the Laotian government is still sticking to its plan.  'We are  confident that the Xayaburi Hydroelectric Power Project will not have any  significant impact on the Mekong mainstream,' officials from Vientiane (the  capital of Laos) have explained in a note to the Mekong River experts. Mekong experts from Cambodia, Laos, Thailand and Vietnam — the four  countries that share the waters of the lower Mekong - are meeting in late  March to approve the Xayaburi dam plans.  Laos has appealed to its neighbours not to place any roadblocks.  The  government does not want to raise the political stakes to the point of being  compelled to get its dam blueprint approved by ministers or even prime  ministers. 'There will be no need for any extension of time and no need to forward this  matter to the (ministerial) level,' revealed the note by the Laotian government  to Mekong River experts. This dam issue has become the first major test of environmental diplomacy  for the four countries in the lower Mekong, members of the Mekong River  Commission (MRC).  An inter-governmental body that came up after a 1995  agreement, the Vientiane-based body aims to manage the development of  the Mekong basin in consensus.  Any plan to dam the Mekong has to be  scrutinised for its cross-border impact under a special mechanism, formally  known as the Procedure for Notification Prior Consultation and Agreement  (PNPCA). 'This is the first time that we are going through the prior consultation  process,' Jeremy Bird, MRC’s chief executive officer, told IPS.  'Countries do  not have a veto right (to stop a dam being built in a neighbouring country) yet  countries cannot proceed without consultation. 'The MRC’s members have to weigh the provision in the agreement that 'a  country cannot act irresponsibly to impact its neighbour' against every  member’s 'right not to agree' and ability to 'take its own decision,' added  Rudi Veestraeten, Belgium’s envoy to Thailand.  MRC is funded by Belgium,  along with other European countries, Australia and Canada. Till now the 4,880-km long Mekong has remained free of dams along its  journey through the basin, winding its way past Burma along the four MRC  partners till it falls in the South China Sea in southern Vietnam. But upstream, the river’s flow from its headwaters in the Tibetan plateau  through southern China has been harnessed by four dams in China’s Yunnan  province, part of a cascade of eight mega dams the Asian giant plans.  Local  activists, environmentalists and even government experts of the lower  Mekong are alarmed. The impact of the Chinese dams on the downstream countries has  strengthened the campaigns led by Towards Ecological Recovery and Regional  Alliance (TERRA), a Bangkok-based green lobby.  TERRA warns that dams on  the lower Mekong will affect the lives of 60 million people who depend on  food and their livelihood from the river. 'Laos has not helped its case because the government has refused to make  public the EIA (environmental impact assessment) it has done for the Xayaburi  dam,' Premrudee Daoroung, co-director of TERRA, told IPS.  'The Laotian  government says it is a secret document. 'The dam blueprint puts red and green interests at loggerheads across an  international border. 