After five years of preparation the international community is expected to launch  the Intergovernmental Platform on Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services this year.   For some of its proponents, even the decisions of the World Trade Organisation  should be subject to its analysis. IPBES would be analogous to the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change  (IPCC), but focused on biological diversity. The idea behind this effort is that decisions by all levels of government are  largely responsible for the decline in species and ecosystems that support life  on the Earth.  To put an end to species decline, governments need an independent,  authoritative scientific body that can assess the impacts of proposed policies  and decisions that biodiversity experts have long recommended. 'People generally have yet to appreciate the importance of biodiversity and  ecosystem services, and how much is at stake in biodiversity loss,' Charles  Perrings, professor of environmental economics at Arizona State University in  the U. S.  southwest, told Tierramérica. 'Biodiversity' is the term used to describe the wide variety of living things that  comprise the planet's biological infrastructure and provide us with health,  wealth, food, water, fuel and other vital services.  Several reports, including last year's Global Biodiversity 3, show that policy  decisions and failures to enforce regulations have put the biological  infrastructure in jeopardy. Many people fail to understand how much humans rely on the many natural  services provided by nature and how fast this is changing, said Perrings. 'Decisions taken today that change the biosphere will have profound  implications for humanity's welfare.  They must be well informed by science,'  he said. In his view, 'proposals put forward by the World Trade Organisation would  potentially be assessed for consequences on habitat or if they would lead to  dispersal of species around the globe, worsening the problem of invasive  species. 'The current WTO Doha Round of trade negotiations on agricultural subsidies  should be evaluated for their potential impacts on biodiversity, he said: 'The  consequences of changes in agricultural policies would be among the first  things we want to assess because their significant potential impacts. 'IPBES will not only raise awareness about the importance of biodiversity  among decision makers, it will provide them with authoritative projections of  the effects of their policies, according to Connie Martinez, senior policy  officer at the International Union for the Conservation of Nature (IUCN) in  Gland, Switzerland. 'Officials in all departments (ministries) need a better understanding of how  economic development can impact biodiversity,' Martinez told Tierramérica. As such, IPBES would not just inform environment ministers, it would look at  all major policy decisions with the potential to affect ecosystems, said  Perrings, who has worked for years to establish such an organisation.  Perrings says there is also an urgent need to understand the consequences of  the rapid changes in biodiversity occurring over recent decades. Policies on renewable energy, such as biofuels, have moved ahead without  assessment of their considerable potential impacts on biodiversity, according  to Harold Mooney, of Stanford University, co-author with Perrings of a recent  paper on IPBES in the Feb.  18 edition of the journal Science. 'The objective of IPBES is to make the science-policy interface work better to  inform decision makers,' Mooney said in a Tierramérica interview.  IPBES is all about providing the best possible science regarding potential  consequences of policy decisions and it is not about advocating for particular  policies, he said. It is not solely a matter of conservation, because natural ecosystems provide a  huge range of valuable economic services to humans, their Science article  notes.  For example, forests and wetlands prevent flooding.  An average hectare of  coral reef provides services to humans valued at 130,000 dollars per year, and  in some places as much as 1. 2 million dollars per year.  Planting mangroves along a coastline in Vietnam, for example, cost 1. 1  million dollars, but saved 7. 3 million dollars annually in dike maintenance. Nevertheless, although 93 countries agreed in June 2010 to create IPBES, it  has no budget, no home, no staff and only a vague outline of how it all might  work.  Like the IPCC on climate, the new panel would focus on exhaustive review of  the results of global research on biodiversity and, based on that research,  would outline projections and scenarios, and draw up recommendations. The United Nations Environment Program's Governing Council, comprised of  environment ministers, met in Kenya last week to give formal approval for the  first IPBES plenary conference this year.  During that plenary -- expected for October 2011 -- decisions about budget,  locations, organization and operational structure will be worked out.  South  Korea and Kenya have expressed strong interest in hosting the new  organisation. The European Union has urged that IPBES become operational as quickly as  possible to demonstrate that 'the international community is determined to  tackle the grand challenge of biodiversity loss,' the EU delegation in Kenya  said in a statement. Meaningful participation of civil society will be critical for the success of  IPBES, says IUCN's Martinez.  For example, indigenous peoples are crucial for  the conservation and sustainable use of biodiversity and ecosystem services.  Civil society will have an important role in IPBES, acknowledges Perrings, but  as in the IPCC only governments will be able to vote he pointed out. IPBES is intended to be independent of UNEP or the UN Convention on  Biological Diversity, says Nick Nuttall, a UNEP spokesperson.  As for avoiding some of the minor controversies around the IPCC and its  conclusions on climate change, Nuttall told Tierramérica that IPBES benefits  from that experience and will ensure it maintains 'the highest level of  scientific rigour. 'With a bit of luck, IPBES will up and running early in 2012, says Perrings. *This story was originally published by Latin American newspapers that are  part of the Tierramérica network.  Tierramérica is a specialised news service  produced by IPS with the backing of the United Nations Development  Programme, United Nations Environment Programme and the World Bank.  