Africa faces an unprecedented opportunity to transform itself, says the World  Bank.  Its new strategy for the continent aims to leverage growing South-South  investment to ensure more inclusive development, while identifying five poor  states as 'Growth Poles'. The Bank says its new plan will prioritise employment and competitiveness,  while also addressing the problems that make African countries particularly  vulnerable to disaster, disease and climate change.  Until the global economic crisis, economic growth on the continent was  averaging five percent a year for a decade.  But, as the World Bank’s new  strategy acknowledges, African countries have continued to face persistent,  long-term development challenges.  Low levels of private investment and human capital, alongside weak  governance, remain key obstacles to the continent’s development efforts,  noted Obiageli Ezekwesili, vice president of the World Bank for the Africa  region.  Furthermore, insufficient increases in productive formal employment, a  massive infrastructure deficit, and the risks that come with climate change all  add to Africa’s woes.  Political backlash against foreign aid, as well as austerity measures in  developed countries, mean the continent will receive less financial assistance  than promised.  And marginalised groups — women and the chronically  impoverished — will feel the gap the most, Ezekwesili stated at the Bank’s  strategy launch on Mar 3.  'Africa’s Future and the World Bank’s Support to It', the Bank’s new plan for  the continent, calls for intervention in three key areas: encouraging  competitiveness, mitigating vulnerability and building the capacity for  improved governance.  The strategy aims to restructure the bank’s approach to the continent,  redefining Africa as 'an investment proposition' to attract private finance,  especially from emerging economies such as China, India and Brazil.  In a departure from the Africa Action Plan (AAP) — the bank’s previous  regional strategy document — the new plan is the culmination of a year-long  consultation process that surveyed 1,000 people across Africa and 400  people online.  The World Bank learned its lessons from the AAP experience, Ezekwesili  admitted.  'Previously, even though there was a level of consultation, it was  not adequate. 'Those surveyed identified poor governance as the main challenge for the  continent’s development, attributing deficiencies in infrastructure provision  and social services to corruption and the lack of public sector capacity to  manage resources.  The World Bank regards political instability; the proliferation of fragile states  across the continent; and resource-rich countries afflicted by widespread  corruption and civil conflict as exacerbating governance challenges.  The Bank’s plan is based on an ambitious foundation to develop governance  and public sector capacity, by increasing citizens’ access to information  through supporting monitoring and expenditure tracking surveys by non- state actors.  'We will focus on both the supply side and the demand side of governance,'  declared Ezekwesili.  'On the demand side, our strategy will be to strengthen citizens’ voice using  instruments of social accountability and we will exploit the use of ICT  (information and communication technologies) to provide innovative ways for  citizens to demand results. 'The strategy aims to help countries diversify their economies and generate  jobs through harnessing private sector growth, especially for the estimated  seven to 10 million young people who enter the labour force on the continent  every year. Attention is given to technical skills development, the agricultural sector and  scaling up small-scale entrepreneurs in strategic sectors.  The plan includes the development of several 'Growth Poles' to support urban  development through deploying 'a critical mass of reforms, infrastructure  investments and skill-building on the industries and locations of highest  potential'.  The Bank is planning 'Growth Poles' in Madagascar, Cameroon, Mozambique,  The Gambia and the Democratic Republic of Congo. Emphasis is placed on government interventions in industries which have a  latent competitive advantage, as well as those that seek to create a less  constrained business environment.  The second pillar of the Bank’s strategy focuses on mitigating the effects of  macroeconomic shocks, health shocks, natural disasters and the  consequences of conflict and political violence.  The plan suggests more space for social safety nets that can be rapidly scaled  up in the face of increased hardship.  It also envisions broader public health  interventions, as well as 'insurance-like mechanisms' and support for private  healthcare to boost delivery capacity.  In response to climate change, the World Bank plan identifies cost-effective  measures for adaptation, prioritising the sustainable management of existing  assets, such as fresh water, fisheries, forests and wetlands.  The Bank aims to implement its new strategy predominantly through  partnerships, knowledge development and finance, emphasising a shift in  priorities from financing instruments to public-private dialogue and  strengthening regional structures like the African Development Bank.  Ezekwesili stressed the need for World Bank interventions to complement  national policies.  She believes national governments should take  responsibility for their fiscal and policy choices.  The strategy will inform the Bank’s engagement with the continent over the  next 10 years, as well as its affiliated development and financial institutions. Ezekwesili concluded that, through strategic selectivity, the strategy must be  implemented 'in order to deliver impact for the citizens of Africa, for whom  the primary responsibility to deliver results lie with their own governments'.  