Eco-farming could double food production in entire regions  within 10 years  while mitigating climate change, according to a new U. N.   report released  Tuesday in Geneva. An urgent transformation to ‘eco-farming’ is the only way to  end hunger and  face the challenges of climate change and rural poverty,  said Olivier De  Schutter, U. N.  Special Rapporteur on the right to food,  following the  presentation of his annual report focusing on agro-ecology  and the right to  food to the U. N.  Human Rights Council. 'Agro-ecology mimics nature not industrial processes.  It  replaces the  external inputs like fertiliser with knowledge of how a  combination of plants,  trees and animals can enhance productivity of the land,' De  Schutter told IPS,  stressing that, 'Yields went up 214 percent in 44 projects  in 20 countries in  sub-Saharan Africa using agro-ecological farming techniques  over a period  of 3 to 10 years… far more than any GM [genetically  modified] crop has ever  done. 'Other recent scientific assessments have shown that small  farmers in 57  countries using agro-ecological techniques obtained average  yield increases  of 80 percent.  Africans’ average increases were 116 percent. 'Today’s scientific evidence demonstrates that agro- ecological methods  outperform the use of chemical fertilisers in boosting food  production in  regions where the hungry live,' De Schutter said. Agro-ecology applies ecological science to the design of  agricultural systems.   It enhances soil productivity and protects crops against  pests by relying on  the natural elements. Eco-farming doesn’t require expensive inputs of fossil-fuel- based pesticides,  fertilisers, machinery or hybrid seeds.  It is ideally suited  for poor smallholder  farmers and herders who are the bulk of the one billion  hungry people in the  world.  Efforts by governments and major donors such as the  400-million- dollar Alliance for a Green Revolution in Africa (AGRA) to  subsidise fertilizer  and hybrid seeds will produce quick boosts in yields but are  not sustainable in  the long term, De Schutter said. Malawi is touted as an AGRA success story by funders such as  the Gates  Foundation and the Rockefeller Foundation who have massively  subsidised  fertilizer and created a corresponding improvement in food  production.   However the country simply cannot afford to continue those  subsidies and is  shifting its strategy to agro-ecology.  'The [Malawi]  government now  subsidises farmers to plant nitrogen-fixing trees in their  fields to ensure  sustained growth in maize production,' he said. De Shutter says AGRA is looking for quick results and is  getting them.  He has  found it difficult to overcome AGRA proponents’ suspicions  about the  effectiveness of agro-ecology, despite the mounting  evidence.  'I expect  countries to express scepticism towards these solutions  because they are not  in accord with the dominant paradigm,' De Schutter said. The dominant view of agriculture is the industrial approach  - of maximising  efficiency and yield.  However that system is utterly  dependent on cheap fossil  fuels and never having to be held accountable for  environmental degradation  and other impacts. One the most under-acknowledged but astonishing impacts is  on the global  climate. 'It is fair to say that between 45 and 50 percent of all  human emissions of  global warming gases come from the current form of food  production,' De  Shutter says. Climate-damaging emissions from industrial agriculture are  more than just  carbon dioxide from burning fossil fuels.  They include  massive amounts of  the super-heating greenhouse gases like methane from animals  and nitrous  oxide from chemical fertiliser.  Add in deforestation - which  is mostly done to  increase farmland or plantations - and that’s around a third  of all emissions.   Now add on the emissions from food processing and the long  distance  transport of foods around the world and it comes close to  half of all human  emissions. The food system doesn’t have to be a major source of  emissions, the problem  is just the way we have designed it around cheap fossil fuel  energy, he said.   Eco-farming can produce more food for the world’s poorest  people, while  also resulting in a fraction of the emissions.  It can even  store carbon in the  soil. The international movement of millions of small-scale  peasant farmers called  La Via Campesina have been trying to make the same point  since at least  2009.  'Peasant farmers from La Via Campesina and others can  help cool the  planet,' Chavannes Jean-Baptiste, a Haitian farmer told IPS. 'The evidence is irrefutable.  If we can change the way we  farm and the way we  produce and distribute food, then we have a powerful  solution for combating  the climate crisis,' said Henk Hobbelink, coordinator of  GRAIN, an  international non-governmental organisation that produced a  report in 2009  showing that industrial agriculture was by far the biggest  source of climate- disrupting emissions of greenhouse gases. 'There are no technical hurdles to achieving these results,  it is only a matter  of political will,' Hobbelink told IPS. Trade, economic and agricultural policies are all skewed in  favour of the  current industrial food production system.  And many of those  policies are  pushing small farmers - the ones who are by far the most  efficient in terms  of carbon emissions and energy use according to GRAIN - off  the land. De Shutter says the techniques and benefits of agro-ecology  are now well  established, so his role is to push governments to change  policies and  support the transformation of food production.  His report  offers policy- relevant recommendations for countries, such as increasing  public funding for  research and training. Agro-ecology is knowledge-intensive and farmers don’t have  access to  training except in a few countries like Brazil and Benin. 'Private companies will not invest time and money in  practices that cannot be  rewarded by patents and which don’t open markets for  chemical products or  improved seeds,' De Shutter said. 'If we don't radically transform the direction of the global  food system we will  never feed the billion who are hungry,' De Shutter warns.   'Nor will we be able  to feed ourselves in the future. '