India’s Supreme Court has questioned clearances to industries on the basis of  environment impact assessments (EIAs) carried out by private consultants in the  pay of project proponents. A special bench of the court led by Chief Justice S. H.  Kapadia, that is hearing a  petition challenging approvals granted to the French company Lafarge to mine  limestone, likened the practice to 'paying the piper to call the tune. ' Kapadia’s bench noted that every report that had been placed before it was  produced by agencies hired by Lafarge.  The judge commented on Mar.  4 that  it was unlikely that a 'project proponent (private company) would pay a  packet of money to get an adverse report. 'Kapadia, who is gaining a reputation as an activist judge in an atmosphere  ridden with scams and cases of high corruption, kicked up a political storm  last week by annulling the appointment of India’s chief vigilance  commissioner P. J.  Thomas.  The fact that Thomas was the main accused in a case of corruption involving  the import of edible palmolein appeared to have been overlooked, and Prime  Minister Manmohan Singh was compelled to accept responsibility for it in  Parliament on Mar.  8.    Kapadia’s views on the way EIAs are carried out have serious implications for  investors planning to set up environmentally sensitive industries.  Leading  environmental activists have welcomed the court’s pronouncements. 'An EIA should be carried out and approved at the planning stage and not  after land has been acquired and loans taken from banks, as is being done in  this country,' Ravi Agarwal, who leads the prominent environment activist  group Toxic Links, told IPS.  'But that is not the way they are done in this  country. ' M. H.  Qureshi, former professor of geography at the centre for the study of  regional development at the Jawaharlal Nehru University in New Delhi told IPS  that EIAs are not conducted seriously.  'EIAs are seen as a perfunctory  exercise,' he told IPS. Qureshi, who is a member of the Narmada Control Authority (NCA) which  monitors resettlement and rehabilitation of tens of thousands of people  people displaced by the mega Narmada valley project, said it is important to  consider the opinions of people from different disciplines before large  projects are planned.  'Agencies hired by private players rarely take into account the interests of  important stakeholders such as people living close to a planned project,'  Qureshi said.  How a project would affect the local population, biodiversity, air and water  quality, catchment area and groundwater contamination should be considered  at the EIA stage along with detailed studies and public comments, said  Qureshi. The International Association for Impact Assessment (IAIA) defines an EIA as  'the process of identifying, predicting, evaluating and mitigating the  biophysical, social, and other relevant effects of development proposals prior  to major decisions being taken and commitments made. 'India’s environment minister Jairam Ramesh said at a press conference on  Feb.  15 that there is a tendency in India to start work on projects without  seeking clearances from his ministry or its agencies.   'The attitude is that the system can be navigated and that clearances can be  managed even after the project is at an advanced stage or complete,' Ramesh  said.  'My ministry will decide on each case according to the laws and  statutes. 'One of the cases that Ramesh is currently looking into is a controversial 2,010  tonne per day 'waste-to-energy' incinerator that is nearing completion in the  heart of the national capital, for which the operator had not sought clearances  from his ministry.  A right-to-information application to the ministry filed by concerned  residents of the area came back with the response that the EIA, to be carried  out by Infrastructure Leasing & Financial Services Limited, was 'not available'.   That was on Aug.  16, 2010 when construction for the plant was more than 50  percent complete.  In many cases EIAs have had to be redrawn after staying on the pending list of  the ministry for years.   When the ministry, on Jan.  31, finally cleared, a 12 billion dollar steel plant to  be built by the South Korean Pohang Steel Company in eastern Orissa state, it  demanded the drawing up of a revised EIA.  Among the deficiencies of the original EIA, prepared in August 2006  by the  Kolkata-based M.  N.  Dastur & Company (P) Ltd.  was the fact it had failed to  mention that the plant was coming up close to a beach where the highly  threatened Olive Ridley turtles nest each year.  Kapadia’s court suggested that the 'huge sums' being spent on private  consultants should channeled into setting up government infrastructure that  is capable of carrying out reliable EIAs.   