Japan’s reputation as a world leader in disaster management is facing a crucial  test as the country scrambles to deal with the massive destruction caused by a  strong earthquake on Friday that has left mounting deaths in the densely  populated northeast. Responding quickly and with accurate information is key to stemming the  ballooning of the crisis that can grow with rumours and panic, experts here  say. Professor Tokiyoshi Yamada, speaking on Japan’s national broadcasting  channel said rescue and evacuation strategies have now begun following the  disaster management programme that is based on carefully analyzed data  that identifies the needs and damage in the affected areas. 'Each village and locality have their own distinct issues, neighbours,  destruction and evacuation needs.  The first step is to assess the damage  based on as much information as we can and then just surge ahead,' he  explained. For now, experts are searching for survivors, a task that is an enormous feat  as many of the affected people in rural areas are aged and live alone.  Because  the tsunami has isolated whole villages by washing away roads, access is also  proving a heavy challenge. Television showed a hospital on the coast of Iwate prefecture, one of worst  affected in the northeast, completely cut off from the rest of the vicinity.   Rescue helicopters had still not reached the building which had SOS in huge  white lettering on its roof top. Long lines of people waited for food and water.  A woman from Iwate said she  had been standing for three hours for food and water but was satisfied her  needs are being met.  A woman in her sixties described her escape as a 'miracle'.  'When the  tsunami warning came I just grabbed a back-pack and ran to a tall building  and walked up several flights of stairs.  I was so frightened but glad I am safe,'  she said. Tens of thousands of people have been evacuated.  Whole villages have been  swept away by a continuous tsunami that has been as high as 10 metres at  places.  Cars, fishing boats and even whole villages have been washed away. In addition, on Saturday afternoon NHK, Japan’s national television, reported  grave news of a possible radioactive leak from a nuclear accident at one of  Fukushima’s nuclear power reactors.  It quoted experts calling for calm and  saying there is no threat to the public.  The earthquake measured 8. 8 on the Japanese seismic scale and is the worst  in a century.  Japan is one of the world’s most vulnerable countries for  earthquakes.  Experts say this one was caused by the movement of 500  kilometres of tectonic plates buried deep in the ocean.  More than 6,000 people died in the 1995 Kobe earthquake.  The death toll  from this earthquake is expected to be in the thousands too. Led by Prime Minister Naoto Kan and his cabinet members, all of whom have  donned working blue uniforms that symbolize the grave work ahead, more  than 50,000 Self Defence Force members have joined hundreds of local  government officials, emergency experts, and medical and civic workers who  have fanned out in vehicles, helicopters or simply on foot to help people still  trapped in rubble. 'The earthquake can be described this time as a tsunami disaster,' Kan told  the press Saturday morning after he returned from a helicopter survey to  estimate the damage.  Kan was referring to the tsunami waves hitting the  coastal areas facing the Pacific Ocean. The western coastal region from Japan’s northern Hokkaido island to the  southern-most Okinawa continues to face a tsunami warning.  The quake also caused destruction in Tokyo, that experienced shocks of 5  magnitude and is home to 13 million people - a tenth of the national  population.  Five deaths have been reported in the city so far, mostly as a  result of falling furniture inside houses. Still, the strongest picture emerging from the chaos on the ground is the stoic  patience of the Japanese public. Japanese television stations provide round the clock news and information,  blankets and food are pouring in from other areas, while hotels are permitting  stranded people to stay in safety.  Take Masaru Kendo, a newspaper man, who delivered his lot of newspapers in  central Tokyo just 15 minutes after the tremor.  He said to panicked staff at an  office he visited: 'I’m sorry I’m late. ' He then ran up another flight of stairs to  his next destination.  