Heightened tension on Saturday after a blast at a nuclear facility in Fukushima,  150 kilometres north of Tokyo, eased off after the government reported that the  danger had been overstated. But anti-nuclear experts continued to express concern.  'There are many areas  that remain unclear in the government’s explanation, which is why we cannot  accept that the coast is clear,' Professor Hiroaki Koiwa from the Research  Reactor Institute at the national Kyoto University told IPS. Television footage Saturday afternoon showed a badly scarred Fukushima  Number 1 nuclear power plant with white smoke plumes coming out of  building.  The ceiling and walls were damaged.  The building is a part of four  reactors that account for 18 percent of Japan’s nuclear power capacity.   The 8. 8 magnitude earthquake on Friday forced the automatic closedown of  the nuclear power plant, leading to the build-up of radioactive hydrogen  inside the turbine building. The Tokyo Electric Power Company ( TEPCO) which owns the nuclear plant had  to release a large amount of hydrogen pressure in the face of reports of a  possible core meltdown in the building. Japanese media quoting experts pointed to widespread radiation  contamination if there would be a core meltdown in the plant.  People in the  area were advised to wear masks. But TEPCO and the Japan Nuclear Safety Commission reported that earlier  estimates of radioactivity of around 1,000 times the normal level, had been  overstated. Chief Cabinet Secretary Yukio Edano told media that TEPCO had successfully  been able to release hydrogen pressure that had been building in the  concrete containment structure, normally about 1. 2 metres thick.  'After the release of the hydrogen, TEPCO reported that radiation level has  dropped to 75 siebel units, which is not dangerous to people,' he said.   Internationally accepted human limits for tolerating radiation are set at 1000  seibel units annually. But Koike points out that if TEPCO released the hydrogen pressure using a  power supply system to work the pump, what did the company then mean  when it reported the shutdown of the facility following the earthquake. Researchers also question the legitimacy of the latest radioactivity leakage  figures stated by TEPCO, pointing out that wind direction plays a key role in  setting standards. Hideki Ban, a leading anti-nuclear power activist and head of the Citizen’s  Nuclear Information Centre, said at a press conference Saturday evening that  the shocking damage to the Fukushima nuclear power plant points to the  need for continued careful monitoring for radioactive leaks, despite  government and TEPCO attempts at defusing tension. 'The Fukushima plant explosion symbolises the terrible threat to human  safety in Japan that is highly vulnerable to earthquakes.  This is another  opportunity to stop this dangerous nuclear power build-up,' he told media.  With some press reports hinting at widespread leaks leading as far as Tokyo,  the public have been shopping hard for basic food items, leading many  supermarkets to report cleaned shelves. Ban contends hydrogen pressure is rising in the turbine building and the key  to containing a major radiation leak is now in the hands of TEPCO that must  work hard to release the pressure.  Anti-nuclear power activists also point out that the Fukushima plant was built  in the 1970s, and does not contain the superior modern safety standards of  today.   One-third of power in Japan is nuclear.  Key nuclear reactors are located in  seismic areas.  Accidents have plagued the plants over the last decade, leading  to deaths among workers and several evacuations.   