A second explosion has rocked Japan's stricken Fukushima  Daiichi nuclear power complex, sending a plume of smoke into  the air and touching off fresh concerns of a radioactive leak  in the quake and tsunami-hit country. The International Atomic Energy Agency said on Monday that  the reactor had not been damaged. The plant operator, Tokyo Electric Power Co (TEPCO), said in  a press release that the blast was believed to be a hydrogen  explosion at the plant's No. 3 reactor and that 11 workers  were injured.  The first explosion happened at the same plant  on Saturday, at the reactor No.  1. TEPCO said that the impact of radioactive materials to the  outside environment is under investigation. Yukio Edano, Japan's chief cabinet secretary, said that a  large-scale radiation leak was unlikely.  Edano said the  reactor's inner containment vessel holding the nuclear fuel  rods was intact, allaying some fears of the risk to the  environment. Al Jazeera's Florence Looi said the cooling system at  reactor No.  2 has also failed, leading to a build-up of  pressure in the containment vessel.  That is the same problem  units one and three encountered before they exploded. Meanwhile, at Fukushima plant, the work to cool the reactors  with a mixture of seawater and boric acid continues — an  untested method, underscoring the desperate nature of the  situation. 'No possibility of a Chernobyl'Japan's nuclear safety agency said there is 'absolutely no  possibility of a Chernobyl' style accident at the Fukushima  No.  1 plant, Koichiro Genba, the national strategy minister  said, as quoted by Jiji Press. The minister made the comment citing the Nuclear and  Industrial Safety Agency at a meeting of the ruling  Democratic Party of Japan. Meanwhile, a U. S.  aircraft carrier deployed for relief  efforts has repositioned after detecting low-level radiation  from a malfunctioning nuclear power plants, a U. S.  statement  has said. People around the area, already ravaged by earthquake and  tsunami, are worried at the prospects of a nuclear  radiation. 'I am due to give birth soon, I want to know exactly what is  going on at the nuclear plant.  I am scared,' said a woman. Twenty people have tested positive for radiation exposure  and that number looks likely to rise. Humanitarian crisisThe humanitarian crisis is deepening too, with thousands of  people still missing as a result of Friday's 8. 9 magnitude  earthquake and tsunami. Foreign aid has begun to arrive and some 70 countries have  offered assistance, with help coming not only from allies  like the United States but also countries with more strained  relations like China. A U. S.  naval ship is being used to help send out supplies  and an aircraft carrier is also on its way to help. According to media reports, rescue workers on Monday found  2,000 bodies in Miyagi province, one of the hardest-hit  regions, while in the city of Rikuzen-takata 18,000 people  are still missing. Millions of people spent a third night without water, food  or heating in near-freezing temperatures along the  devastated northeastern coast. In many areas there is no running water, no power and four-  to five-hour waits for gasoline.  People are suppressing  hunger with instant noodles or rice balls while dealing with  the loss of loved ones and homes. 'People are surviving on little food and water.  Things are  simply not coming,'' Hajime Sato, a government official in  Iwate prefecture, said. Meanwhile, a tsunami alert, which had sparked alarm and  local evacuation orders, has been lifted, according to an  official in the Fukushima prefecture. 'There is no more fear of a tsunami at this moment, but we  will continue to ask our residents to remain vigilant to  future advisories,' the official said. And the Japanese markets, which opened for the first time  since the disaster occurred, reacted badly. Share prices dropped sharply by more than five percent  within the first hour of trading on Monday.  Moving quickly  to try to keep financial markets stable, the Bank of Japan  said it will inject approximately 183 billion dollars into  the money market to try to bring some stability. *Published under an agreement with Al-Jazeera. 