Caribbean officials gathered in Brussels for the region's  annual tourism summit, the first to be held in Europe, are  urging their biggest development partner to draft policies  supporting the lifeblood sector and ease restrictions such as  Britain's Air Passenger Duty (APD), which they say are holding  back its growth. 'We want to encourage a broader awareness that the Caribbean  is now the most tourism-dependent region in the world, and  that our future development relies to a significant extent  on tourism and its myriad economic, social and environmental  linkages,' Ricky Skerrit, chair of the Barbados-based  Caribbean Tourism Organisation (CTO) and the tourism  minister of St.  Kitts and Nevis, told European legislators  Monday. The Caribbean now has the 13th largest tourism industry  globally in absolute size and it is the biggest employer in  the region after the public sector.  It is also the largest  single contributor to Gross Domestic Product, and in 2010,  was worth an estimated 39. 4 billion dollars. Such is the importance of the industry is that while most  Caribbean countries experienced a deficit in trade in goods,  this was offset by a surplus in trade in services, fuelled  mainly by receipts from tourism and travel-related  activities. Official figures show that during 2008-2009, for example,  the deficit in trade in goods averaged 3. 1 billion Euros  (4. 1 billion dollars).  In that same period, the surplus  generated from tourism and travel related activities  averaged 2. 5 billion Euros (2. 7 billion dollars). Skerrit said that the visit by the Caribbean delegation  would also provide an opportunity to discuss how the tourism  chapter in the Economic Partnership Agreement (EPA) signed  between Europe and the Caribbean Forum (CARIFORUM) countries  in 2008 'is to be made operational and support made  available for both the public and private sector'. 'We especially want to ensure that tourism becomes deeply  embedded in all future EU/Caribbean strategic planning,' he  said.  'We hope too that today will lead to an ongoing  dialogue with multilateral and bilateral funding agencies to  support tourism development finance and encourage private  investment. ''And we want to understand the current European approaches  to aviation taxation, security, the environment, carbon  trading and clean energy in the context of a future  Caribbean tourism policy,' he said.  'Perhaps this is an  ambitious hope, but it is a hope that speaks to the very  survival of our Caribbean economies and hope for our  Caribbean people. 'It was a theme not lost on the acting secretary general of  the 15-member Caribbean Community (CARICOM) bloc, Ambassador  Lolita Applewhaite. The summit provides 'a unique opportunity for the Caribbean  to exchange views with its most important development  partner on policy issues related to Caribbean tourism,  including aviation taxation, the impact of crime, the need  to increase airlift, training and research, public health,  foreign direct investment in the industry and CARIFORUM-EU  cooperation in tourism within the context of the CARIFORUM- EU Economic Partnership Agreement,' she said. Applewhaite noted that the sector is currently beset by a  number of challenges.   'Among these is aviation taxation,  which we view as a tax on our development,' she told EU  legislators.  'Air travel represents the only realistic way  for tourists to reach our region from Europe - an important  long-haul market for the Caribbean. 'Europe plays a vital role as a hub in the Caribbean tourism  business, she said, with airports in London, Frankfurt,  Amsterdam, Madrid and Paris serving as transit points for  visitors from emerging markets in Central Europe, China,  India and Russia. She said the aviation tax 'has a significant negative impact  on our finances, on aviation, maritime transport, on tourism  and foreign relations, indeed on our entire development. 'Caribbean countries are worried that Britain, for example,  which provides as much as 38 percent of visitors to some  regional countries, has now imposed an Air Passenger Duty  (APD) on outgoing flights.  'We view the APD as discriminatory against Caribbean  destinations and Caribbean people living in the United  Kingdom seeking to travel to the region,' Applewhaite said. A report on the impact of this tax - produced by the CTO and  presented to the Treasury and Department for Transport of  Britain - shows that arrivals from the UK to the Caribbean  are declining while those from other source markets are  increasing.  It argues that by simplifying the banding system  and adjusting the duty levels slightly, the APD or any  successor tax could be made more environmentally apt, while  projecting similar levels of revenue. 'It is clear, however, that even if the particular design  problems that the Caribbean is seeking to have addressed in  relation to the UK APD are resolved, this tax could be only  the tip of a global fiscal iceberg that may eventually come  to include all aviation and maritime transport,' Applewhaite  added, noting that 'similar unilateral measures have also  been introduced by other countries in Europe'. Caribbean officials also expressed concerns about the  additional burden brought on by the inclusion of aviation in  the EU Emissions Trading Scheme (EU ETS) that begins next  year.   Recent reports produced by Standard & Poor's suggest  that passengers could face a rise in airfares of up to 40  Euro per ticket once the EU ETS is introduced. Aviation and sea transport were not included in the Kyoto  Protocol on Climate Change due to difficulties in assigning  emissions to any specific country.  At the 37th International  Civil Aviation Organization Assembly Assembly in Montreal,  Canada last year, there was general consensus on the need  for a multilateral approach once general principles had been  agreed on the implementation of market-based measures for  international aviation. 'The Caribbean would prefer to see a multilateral measure  that does not discriminate against one mode of  transportation, is development-oriented, and which takes  into account the vulnerability of the region arising from  climate change,' Applewhaite said. 