As Japan continues to battle the threat of nuclear meltdown in  the wake of Friday's devastating earthquake, lawmakers,  environmental activists and the nuclear industry in the United  States are squaring up for a heated contest over the future of  atomic energy in this country. With the U. S.  counted among the world's biggest producers of  nuclear power, debate is centring on Washington's ability to  handle a similar disaster should it occur. There are 104 nuclear reactors across the U. S.  — 35 of which  are boiling-water reactors of a similar design to the  troubled models in Japan — and policymakers such as  Massachusetts Democrat Edward Markey are now questioning  their safety. In a letter to the Nuclear Regulatory Commission (NRC) dated  Mar.  11, Markey raised fears about the resilience of the  nuclear power plants, several of which lie on or near fault  lines.  Of particular concern, he writes, is a nuclear reactor  design - manufactured by Westinghouse and currently under  review by the NRC - which has reportedly failed seismic  shock tests. According to Markey, a senior engineer at NRC charges that  the AP1000 reactor's shield is so brittle it 'could shatter  like a glass cup', under stress generated by an earthquake. The congressman also highlighted concerns about the U. S. 's  ability to respond to a nuclear disaster, following recent  revelations the Environmental Protection Agency, the NRC and  the Federal Emergency Management Agency have been unable to  agree on which agency would lead efforts to address a  reactor meltdown.  Markey has requested a thorough investigation into safety  regulations in light of the events unfolding in Japan, where  authorities reported a further 'huge explosion' at the  Fukushima nuclear power plant on Monday, triggering fears of  a serious radiation leak. A 20km exclusion zone remains around the plant and local  media have reported radiation levels rising in Ibaraki,  between Fukushima and Tokyo.  However, the Japanese Government has been playing down the  threat posed by the ageing reactors, despite requesting  urgent assistance from both the NRC and the United Nations  atomic watchdog. Back in the U. S. , the Barack Obama administration has moved  to reassure the public over the safety of its nuclear  plants, brushing aside calls for a moratorium on nuclear  power development. President Obama has already requested an additional 36  billion dollars in loan guarantee authority for new nuclear  reactors in 2012.  If authorised, this would make a total of  54. 5 billion dollars in nuclear loan guarantees. Industry lobby group, the Nuclear Energy Institute (NEI),  has also attempted to stem rising concerns over the future  of nuclear energy. In a statement on its website the NEI said it was too  'premature' to draw parallels between the Japanese and U. S.   nuclear programmes. 'Japan is facing what literally can be considered a 'worst  case' disaster and, so far, even the most seriously damaged  of its 54 reactors has not released radiation at levels that  would harm the public,' the group claimed, reiterating  advances made in nuclear energy production in recent years. 'Until we understand clearly what has occurred at the  Fukushima Daiichi nuclear power plants, and any  consequences, it is difficult to speculate about the long- term impact on the U. S.  nuclear energy programme. 'However Linda Gunter, from the anti-nuclear group Beyond  Nuclear, called for greater transparency from the country's  nuclear lobby and the Japanese government. Gunter told IPS the partial meltdown at the Fukushima plant  should serve as a wake-up call to those advocating nuclear  power. 'Even if you get away from the safety issue, which is  obviously front and centre right now because of what's  happening in Japan, and you look at solutions to climate  change, then nuclear energy takes way too long to build,  reactors take years to come online, they're wildly  expensive.  Most of the burden of the cost will fall on the  U. S.  taxpayer in this country, so why go there?' she said. 'And the possibility of it going radically wrong, the  outcome is so awful that morally you can't justify it,' she  added.  'The reliability of nuclear power is practically zero  in an emergency when you have this confluence of natural  disasters. 'In Japan, where up to 10,000 people are feared to have  perished in Friday's tsunami, the nuclear concerns are  compounding what is being described as the country's worst  disaster since World War II.  In light of this, Beyond Nuclear and other anti-nuclear  organisations are calling for a complete phase-out of  nuclear power plants and stronger investment in green  energy. 'We have the technology now to go to 100 percent renewables  and efficiency,' said Harvey Wasserman, editor of the  www. nukefree. org website and author of 'Solartopia!  Our  Green-powered Earth'. 'But the corporations have huge investments that would be  threatened by rendering coal, oil, nukes and gas - I call  them 'King Cong' — obsolete,' he told IPS.  'They also fear  the installation of an energy system that can be community- controlled rather than corporately monopolised.   So it's  ultimately a struggle between rich and poor, corporations  and communities, and technologies of death versus those of  survival.  'Other experts stress the dangerous connection between  nuclear power and nuclear weapons proliferation. 'The already oversold 'nuclear renaissance' is definitely  over,' said John Burroughs, executive director of the  Lawyers Committee on Nuclear Policy and director of the U. N.   Office of IALANA, the International Association of Lawyers  Against Nuclear Arms. 'Every nuclear reactor produces spent fuel containing  plutonium, which with chemical processing can be used in  weapons,' he told IPS.  'The weapons-nuclear power connection  must be part of the reassessment of nuclear power. ' 'Undoubtedly the disaster will give rise to renewed demands  for truth-telling by the nuclear power industry and its  regulators.  That same demand should be extended to nuclear  weapons establishments in the nine countries that possess  nuclear arsenals and the many countries in nuclear-weapon  alliances,' he said. The five 'declared' nuclear powers are the United States,  Britain, France, China and Russia, while the four  'undeclared' nuclear states are India, Pakistan, Israel and  North Korea. *Additional reporting by Kanya D'Almeida. 