Tourism as a concern found its way onto the agenda of the 1992 Earth Summit  in Rio de Janeiro because of its potential for development but also due to its  adverse effects on some populations and natural resources, particularly in Africa. Sustainable tourism was defined at the summit as tourism that 'meets the  needs of present tourists and host regions while protecting and enhancing  opportunities for the future'.  The many definitions of 'responsible travel' all insist on the conservation of  nature, of cultures, and on economic and social development.  Meanwhile, the  market has been booming. Global figures are hard to come by.  But 'Responsible Travel', a British tour  operator that sells 'travel which respect and benefits local people and the  environment', says it has sold 3,900 holidays since 2004.  ATES, the French Association for Fair Tourism, says it has sold holidays to  20,000 'responsible travellers' since 2006.  Their annual numbers doubled  between 2006 and 2009. Tourism has indeed been hailed as the key to development in many  countries.  But its unintended consequences have included environmental  degradation, as well as community factionalism and social stratification  whenever communities do not enjoy a fair share of jobs and revenue.  'The history of tourism has been mostly negative for local communities and  ecosystems,' says Amanda Stronza, an environmental anthropologist who  teaches at the Texas A&M University.  'Cannibal Tours', a 1988 anthropological documentary which follows bright- eyed, camera-laden tourists asking village elders when they last ate human  flesh, and haggling over two dollars’ worth of wooden necklaces, is a vivid  illustration of the underbelly of tourism. 'During the height of modernisation in international development in the  1970s, large-scale tourism was heralded enthusiastically and often  uncritically as a veritable ‘passport to development’,' argues Stronza. 'Entire nations advertised themselves as pristine paradises and promised  plenty of sun, sand, sea, and sex.  The goals of tourism investment, then, were  almost purely macroeconomic,' she says. Sustainable tourism, by contrast, aims at empowering local communities to  manage and benefit from environmentally sound accommodation and tours. 'It’s a model in which the tourist encounters genuine inhabitants of a place,  who benefit from and run tourism ventures,' says Julien Buot, coordinator of  ATES. 'It’s at the crossroads between cultural travel, development economics, fair  trade and international solidarity,' he says. The San, from the Kalahari desert in southern Africa, have had first-hand  experience of the virtues and drawbacks of tourism.  Scattered across  Botswana, Namibia and Zimbabwe, they have organised to benefit from the  numerous tourists eager to meet 'Bushmen'. 'One of the big problems with tourism in San communities was the problem  of unfair distribution of tourism benefits,' says Robert Hitchcock, who chairs  the department of anthropology at Michigan State University. 'Social costs include greater access to alcohol, with contributes to community  tensions, and the spread of diseases, including HIV and AIDS and  tuberculosis,' he explains. In the 1970s, the Botswana government shifted to the position that the San  should not be exploited as ‘‘tourism objects’’, and that Gaborone should not  be engaged in what some felt to be the ‘‘exploitation of the San’’. 'In some communities, responsible operators have worked out agreements  with local people to hire them as guides, to provide some benefits for  development projects and to run social services like medical care and  professional training,' Hitchcock says.  'But this is rare. 'Most sustainable tourism ventures are too recent to assess the long-term  benefits to locals.  Responsible operators now know what doesn’t work.  But  successful sustainable tourism remains a tricky formula. 'Three-way partnerships between local communities, private companies, and  nongovernmental organisations (NGOs) seem to be ideal for making  ecotourism work for triple goals of conservation, development, and profit,'  says Stronza. 'When all three actors participate, local people are able to contribute their  knowledge and resources; tour operators can provide investment capital,  business acumen, and managerial experience; and NGOs can help with  networking, skills building and cultural brokering,' she explains. There are dozens of sustainable tourism labels, many of which are not subject  to a robust certification scheme.  'Ecotourism can never be a panacea for any community's array of economic or  social challenges,' Stronza says.  'But NGO support may be ‘the secret  ingredient’ for making ecotourism not just an end in itself, but also a catalyst  for broader social, environmental, and cultural initiatives,' she believes. However, some sustainable tourism operations are fragile, have failed in the  past because of political instability or civil unrest in the region.  'This has  happened to well-established operations, as in the Kenya safari industry a few  years ago when violence over presidential elections erupted, or in northern  Ecuador, where coca eradication is associated with guerrillas and terrorism,  Stronza points out.  