Day five of Japan's post-earthquake, post-tsunami life dawned  dismally Tuesday, with soaring radiation levels from the  Fukushima Daiichi power plants and a relentlessly rising death  toll in the four worst-affected prefectures. When the 9. 0 earthquake first hit Japan, its highly advanced  disaster-alert systems minimised the impact of what in most  other countries would have been a catastrophic event,  leaving about 100 people dead. But when the 10-metre high tsunami engulfed the islands  shortly after, the disaster swiftly became too great for  even the world's third most industrialised nation to cope  with alone. Since last Friday, the government of Japan reports that  close to 3,200 people in 12 prefectures have died, though  less conservative estimates say the number is at least  double that, with a projected death toll of 10,000 in the  coming days.  National media reports claim that over 15,000  people are missing in the affected areas. In Fukushima alone, 1,200 people are unaccounted for, a  number that is likely to rise drastically within the week.   Over 10,000 people are stranded in Iwate and 1,000 more in  Miyagi and Fukushima.  Minami Sannriku town in Miyagi  prefecture and Otsuchi town in Iwate prefectures are  currently the worst affected areas with an estimated 20,000  people — nearly half the population — still out of contact  as of Tuesday. The United Nations Office for the Coordination of  Humanitarian Assistance (OCHA) dispatched its Disaster  Assessment and Coordination (UNDAC) team to Tokyo Monday, at  the behest of the Japanese government, to coordinate foreign  aid flows, an onslaught of international humanitarian  assistance and local relief efforts. 'The team is helping the Japanese authorities with  information management and international offers of  assistance,' Martin Nesirky, the spokesperson for the U. N.   secretary-general, told reporters Tuesday, 'and it plans to  send a reconnaissance mission to the prefectures of  Fukushima and Miyagi tomorrow. 'This particular UNDAC mission is playing a more limited role  than its predecessors, since Japanese authorities are primed  to direct the bulk of search and rescue efforts in their own  capacity.  UNDAC's role is rather to provide a few select  services and defer to the authority of the Japanese  government in major decision-making. 'UNDAC has been providing advice on incoming international  relief goods and services, with the view to limiting  unsolicited contributions,' Stephanie Bunker, spokesperson  and public information officer of OCHA in New York, told  IPS. 'This is actually a very important task because as we've  seen in many disasters, countries have been inundated with  unsolicited contributions.  People mean well, but an overflow  of uncoordinated aid is not necessarily a good thing,' she  added. The seven-member disaster response team includes specialists  from France, Britain, Sweden, India, the Republic of Korea  and Japan.  They have set up an Onsite Operations and  Coordination Centre and will be disseminating timely  information to the international community in the coming  days. According to OCHA's most recent situation report, nearly  420,000 people have been evacuated from the earthquake- and  tsunami-hit areas, of which nearly half are from Miyagi  alone and the rest in varying degrees from Fukushima, Iwate,  Ibaraki, Tochibi and Aomori. 'At this point we do not have a sound estimate of the total  costs incurred by the disaster,' Bunker told IPS.  'It is  still much too early to come up with a meaningful number. 'However, OCHA's preliminary research shows that nearly 4,000  buildings in the northeastern region of Tohuku have been  totally destroyed, while a further 55,000 have been severely  damaged by the earthquake, tsunami or fires.  The Japanese  National Police Authority reports that the damage done to  roads and bridges has virtually paralysed huge swathes of  the national transport system. Nearly 850,000 households formerly powered by Tokyo Electric  Power Company and Tohuku Electric Power Company are  currently existing without access to water, gas and  electricity, a crisis that extends way beyond the four most  affected prefectures.  Lack of access to food and water is a  crisis that is only worsening by the hour. The Japanese Red Cross Society has begun offering medical  and psychosocial care to the scores of survivors and  evacuees. 'I have never seen anything as bad as this before.  It defies  belief,' said Tadateru Konoé, president of the Japanese Red  Cross Society and the IFRC following his visit to Iwate  prefecture.  According to IFRC's latest press release,  430,000 evacuees are currently being housed in fewer than  2,500 makeshift evacuation centres in schools and other  public buildings. 'Red Cross medical teams are reporting many cases of people  arriving at hospitals suffering from hypothermia and at risk  of pneumonia.  Many people are suffering the effects of  having swallowed contaminated water during the tsunami,' the  press release added. Despite accepting specialised assistance from certain aid  agencies, Japan is displaying extraordinary resilience and  efficiency in the face of a debilitating disaster. Over 100,000 troops along with 95,000 firefighters and 920  police units are working ceaselessly to evacuate at-risk  citizens, locate missing persons and deliver relief items as  fast as humanly possible. According to OCHA ground reports, the National Police Agency  (NPA) and Japan Self-Defence Forces have already rescued  more than 2,200 people.  In addition, the Japan Coast Guard,  and the Fire and Disaster Management Agency have rescued  nearly 3,000 people, including about 970 affected people  stranded in isolated villages. Furthermore, the NPA added that 121 roads and 28 bridges  have already been repaired, paving the way for more  effective rescue and relief operations. 