Eva, a Ghanian woman, was given five pigs and some training on  how best to care for them.  Eventually, her farm grew to 400  pigs and she was able to buy more land and a motorbike which  she not only used for transporting her goods to market but for  helping neighbours get to town and to hospital quicker. Danielle Mutone-Smith, director of global trade and  agriculture policy at the NGO Women Thrive, cites this as  just one example of the way investing in women working in  agriculture can pay major dividends for not only women's  rights but poor communities and economic development in  general. The benefits of closing the gap that currently exists  between the agricultural inputs available to women employed  in agriculture and those available to men are highlighted in  the U. N Food and Agriculture Organisation's annual 'State of  Food and Agriculture' report, released last week. It found that women have much less access to fertiliser,  seed varieties, livestock, equipment and other inputs, as  well as to the credit and education that can help them  expand production on their farms, and that this leads to  lower productivity by women working in the agricultural  sector compared to their male counterparts. Though the picture varies across continents and cultures,  this equation of lower production due to fewer resources is  'the closest thing you could to a generalisation as far as  women in agriculture goes,' said Terri Raney, a senior  economist at the FAO and editor of the report, at a  discussion Monday in Washington. It also found that even though the agricultural labour force  in developing countries can be as much as 50 percent women,  only three to 20 percent of all landholders in developing  countries where data was available are women. But increasing the resources available to women working in  agriculture — what the report calls closing the 'gender gap'  in agricultural development — would mean a sizeable step not  just toward gender equality or economic development but also  toward combating undernourishment. The FAO estimates that if women had the same access to  resources as men, they would be able to increase their farm  yields 20 to 30 percent, thus raising agricultural output in  developing countries 2. 5 to four percent.  This figure could  translate to 100 to 150 million fewer undernourished people  globally, or a 12 to 17 percent drop from today's levels. 'We're talking about 100 million people whose lives could be  changed by basically evening the playing field in some  sense,' said Mutone-Smith. Implementation already under wayRaney added that, globally, women who are employed are on  average more likely to be employed in agriculture than in  any other sector. 'So women are important for agriculture and agriculture is  important for women,' she said.  'What I like to say is  agricultural policy is gender policy since so much of the  laboUr force is women. 'Donors of foreign aid have been aware of this relationship  for decades, but their actions have been scaled up in recent  years. That may be due to both the increased awareness of the role  that agricultural productivity plays in economic development  and the increased awareness that women are crucial to that  agricultural work, said Eija Peju, who leads the World  Bank's work on gender in agriculture. Gender issues emerged for good as a World Bank priority in  2007 with the implementation of a Gender Action Plan to  increase women's access to jobs, land rights, financial  services and agricultural inputs, as well as other policies  ensuring that gender issues are taken into account in Bank  projects. 'There has been attention paid for two or three decades, but  it was here and there,' said Peju, 'That changed in 2008. 'Pehu points to a project that helped women in Mali grow  higher value produce to export and increase their incomes  and a project in Kosovo to train and provide support to  women who were unaware of their legal rights to land  ownership. Among the steps the FAO recommends for closing the gender  gap in inputs is ensuring the equality of women under the  law so that they are able to inherit land, open bank  accounts and sign contracts, a process that requires not  just changing official laws but ensuring that the laws are  applied, said Raney. The World Bank has been trying to help with this process in  Ethiopia, where the government and donors are increasing  women's land rights through both simple fixes — putting more  space on land certificates for small photos and the name of  both the husband and the wife — and more complex ones —  mapping land holdings with satellite technology. Other donors like the U. S.  also see women and girls as at  the heart of global development investments, such as the  Feed the Future initiative and the Global Agriculture and  Food Security Program. This can be seen in U. S.  Secretary of State Hillary  Clinton's modification of the proverb 'Give a man a fish and  he'll eat for a day, but teach a man to fish and he'll eat  for a lifetime. ''If you teach a woman to fish,' Clinton has said, 'She'll  feed her whole village. '