Workers battling to contain the crisis at Japan's quake- stricken Fukushima nuclear plant were briefly moved to a  bunker because of a rise in radiation levels, local media has  reported. The level of radiation at the plant surged to 1,000  millisieverts early on Wednesday before coming down to 800- 600 millisieverts. Harry Fawcett, Al Jazeera's correspondent in Japan, said the  workers struggling to avert a nuclear meltdown were allowed  to return to the facility later. 'The 70 workers who were taken into that protective bunker  were able to go back and restart operations crucial to  keeping this entire plant cool,' he said. 'They have been pumping sea water into the reactors; the  ones that were active before the earthquake and the ones  which were just housing spent fuel,' he added. Yukio Edano, Japan's chief cabinet secretary, said the  workers dousing the reactors in a frantic effort to cool  them needed to be taken to safety after an explosion a day  earlier in the complex's Unit 4 reactor led to a surge in  radiation. The blast is thought to have damaged the reactor's  suppression chamber, a water-filled pipe outside the nuclear  core that is part of the emergency cooling system. Hajimi Motujuku, a spokesman for the plant's operator, Tokyo  Electric Power Company, said the outer housing of the  containment vessel at the Number 4 unit in the plant was in  flames on Wednesday. The plant, 220km north of Tokyo, has been hit by several  explosions after a devastating earthquake and tsunami last  Friday damaged its cooling functions. Damage to reactorsBroadcaster NHK showed photographs of the reactors 3 and 4  at the plant, showing damage to both. Later on Wednesday, a Japanese military twin-rotor cargo  helicopter started dumping water onto a reactor at the plant  in an effort to cool the rods, television images showed. The Japanese authorities had earlier ruled out using  helicopters to pour water into the reactors, saying it was a  high-risk operation. The mission, however, was soon abandoned, NHK reported. 'I assume it hasn't worked or levels of radiation are too  dangerous to be in the air near those stations,' our  correspondent said.  'The situation is deteriorating so badly  they had to try.  They are doing anything that they can. 'The government has ordered some 140,000 people in the  vicinity to stay indoors.  There are six reactors at the plant.  The one still on fire  was not in use at the time of the magnitude 9. 0 quake,  Japan's most powerful on record. The Nuclear and Industrial Safety Agency estimated that 70  percent of the rods have been damaged at the Number 1  reactor. Japan's national news agency, Kyodo, said that 33 percent of  the fuel rods at the Number 2 reactor were damaged and that  the cores of both reactors were believed to have partially  melted. Also on Wednesday, a strong 6. 0 magnitude earthquake was  felt across large areas of eastern Japan, the U. S.   Geological Survey said, with the force strong enough to sway  buildings in the capital Tokyo. The quake struck in the Pacific off Chiba prefecture - 96km  east of the capital.  There were no reports of injuries or  damage following the quake, which struck at a shallow depth  of 25km at 12:52pm (0352 GMT), police and local government  officials said. No tsunami warning was issued but the Japan meteorological  agency warned of a possible change in sea levels. Emperor's addressMeanwhile, Japanese emperor Akihito gave a rare television  address to the nation, in which he described the catastrophe  to have befallen the nation as 'unprecedented in scale'. The 77-year-old said he was 'deeply worried' about the  situation at the crisis-hit Fukushima nuclear plant, in an  appearance which interrupted scheduled programming. 'I am deeply hurt by the grievous situation in the affected  areas.  The number of deceased and missing increases by the  day and we cannot know how many victims there will be.  My  hope is that as many people possible are found safe,'  Akihito said. 'I hope from the bottom of my heart that the people will,  hand in hand, treat each other with compassion and overcome  these difficult times,' he said, urging survivors 'not to  abandon hope'.  Rising tollAuthorities are staring at a staggering death toll following  last week's twin disasters which decimated Japan's  northeastern coastline. Police say at least 5,000 people were killed as huge waves  swept ashore, sweeping away everything in their path. But officials say the death toll could top 10,000 as many  more are still unaccounted for. The devastation in the tsunami-hit areas such as the small  fishing town of Minamisanriku has been huge, with the  northeastern settlement missing about half of its 17,000  people. 'Ten of my relatives are missing.  I haven't been able to get  in contact with them,' 54-year-old Minamisanriku resident  Tomeko Sato, who lost her house in the disaster, told AFP  news agency. 'I was very surprised by the power of the tsunami. . .  next  time, I will live on the hill and hope it never happens  again. 'Andrew Thomas, Al Jazeera's correspondent in Osaka, Japan,  said the trouble with the tsunami is that many of those  people may never be found, having been washed out to sea.  He  also said the weather had taken a turn for the worst for any  survivors. Another of our correspondents in the north said apart from a  few isolated incidents of rescue on Tuesday, the large  amount of work rescuers do is recovering bodies and looking  after those who have been displaced. Millions in Japan have been left without water, electricity,  fuel or enough food.  Hundreds of thousands more are  homeless, stoically coping with snow and freezing rain in  the northeast. *Published under an agreement with Al-Jazeera. 