Several incinerator facilities that were supposed to turn waste into energy have  proven to be white elephants that are now adding to the country’s pollution  woes, instead of alleviating them. 'Massive waste-to-energy plant subsidies are ruining the waste management  field in India,' said Almitra Patel, a civil engineer from the Massachusetts  Institute of Technology in Boston.  'Companies are now using these subsidies  to set up plants that fail. 'Solid waste experts are alarmed these facilities - which failed to work in the  1980s and 1990s - continue to exist. Waste-to-energy (WTE) plants, are releasing toxic fumes because wastes are  not being burned properly.  Waste incineration technology - controversial in  western countries - is even more toxic in India due to mixed, un-segregated  wastes, which emit a medley of poisonous gases such as dioxins and furans  when burned. At Timarpur in New Delhi, a WTE incineration plant imported from the Danish  firm Volund Milijotecknick in 2003 - which subsequently failed - has been  resurrected, and another WTE incinerator is being built in Okhla. Activists are protesting violations of environmental procedures at the  Timarpur plant, which is surrounded by a community of about 500,000. In February 2011, the Asian Development Bank withdrew funding to the plant  under its Asia Pacific Carbon Fund, but the Timarpur Okhla Waste  Management Company claims it will be able to reduce carbon emissions by  262,791 tonnes per year for the next ten years, and has filed for carbon  credits. WTE 'works only on paper', said Mumbai-based Ragini Jain, who works on dry  waste policy, explaining how Indian waste will not combust sufficiently to  produce adequate electricity.  Indian waste is mainly biodegradable  compostable waste with high moisture content.  When it arrives at the WTEs it  is also mixed with non-biodegradable plastics, aluminium and similar  substances - the wastes are not separated. India set up solid waste management rules in 2000, making urban towns  responsible for waste segregation and disposal, and recommending  composting as the most suitable form of waste disposal after segregation. The Solid Waste Rules of 2000 were set up after Patel petitioned the supreme  court in 1996, claiming that the government was neglecting the responsibility  of proper waste management.  The court later appointed Patel head of a  national committee on solid waste. In 2005, Patel again filed a public interest lawsuit before the supreme court,  petitioning the court to put a stay on government subsidies for all proposed  and future WTE projects until the current plants had been adequately  reviewed for feasibility. The court ordered a stay on government subsidies for further WTEs, allowing  only five of these projects to proceed for research and development purposes. The Ministry of New and Renewable Energy however says there is no court ban  on promoting further WTE projects. India now has a reported 33 WTE projects in the works, of which several have  the makings of financial corruption and administrative malfeasance, say NGO  activists and waste management experts in Bangalore, New Delhi and  Mumbai. Shanta Ram Maley, who specialises in solid waste management, pointed to  the lack of understanding in India of technologies for dealing with municipal  wastes, citing current failures in WTE technology in places like Hyderabad and  Vijayawada in southern India, and Chandigarh and Jaipur in northern India. Chandigarh, touted as having India’s most well administered municipality, is  now 'throwing good compost into a landfill [thereby wasting both  compostable material and landfill space]', says Maley.  Following a ban on  plastics and a new recycling system for non-biodegradable wastes, the local  WTE plant in Chandigarh is now deprived of non-biodegradables needed for  refuse-derived pelletisation, and left with incombustible biodegradable waste. 'There is no accountability for operations from these companies, and no  responsibility for their monitoring taken by the Ministry,' Maley says. There is some ambiguity over where responsibility lies.  The Ministry of New  and Renewable Energy passes the buck on approval of technologies to another  department, the Central Pollution Control Board. Under the National Action Plan on Climate Change, WTE technology is one of  the ways the Ministry of New and Renewable Energy has chosen to promote  renewable energy. Small-scale municipal WTE plants are working well.  In Pune, Additional  Municipal Commissioner Suresh Jagtap said a successful system of  segregation has been set up for their twelve micro WTE units. 'Most of these work well only in small-scale systems where wastes can be  segregated according to its nature,' says Maley.  What Indian municipal wastes  need, Maley suggested, is an integrated system of management that  incorporates both composting and small-scale combustion technologies. 