For the past three days Hiroko Oogusa, 62 - following orders from the local  authorities - has remained in her tightly shuttered home located 40 kilometres  from the badly damaged Daiichi nuclear power plant in Fukushima. 'The local town council officials who drove past my house announced through  loudspeakers that we must not go outside and not let air in to protect  ourselves from radiation,' Oogusa told IPS over an intermittent phone line.  'I  am trying hard not to loose hope for I am running out of food and wonder  what is going to happen next. 'Oogusa, who lives in Iwachiku village, weathered the massive quake that hit  Fukushima on Mar.  11.  It shook her house badly, cutting off the water supply  and heat, but never did she expect to be faced with what she describes as a  kind of 'imprisonment'. 'I am angry and sad at the same time over the horror we are facing.  I have  always been unhappy over the nuclear power plants in our area but I could do  nothing about it,' she said. One week after the quake and gigantic tsunami that pounded the northern  Tohoku region and coastline, Japan, an earthquake prone country boasting  the most advanced disaster management technology, is grappling with huge  problems. More than 350,000 people are in evacuation centres, thousands are still  reported missing, and hydrogen explosions have left one of the largest  nuclear power plants in the country vulnerable to serious meltdown. Japan Self-Defence Forces are now spraying water from a helicopter over the  Unit 3 reactor of Fukushima Daiichi power plant to cool the smouldering spent  fuel in the reactor core that is producing dangerous levels of radioactive  energy. The emergency cooling systems including diesel generators and large water  containers are not available because the tsunami, which produced waves as  high as 10 metres, hit the facilities. The government has ordered a 30-kilometre exclusion zone around the plant  to prevent radiation poisoning - this zone was extended says Oogusa to her  village as a precaution by the local authorities two days ago. She describes the cordoned off area as an 'eerie ghost town made worse in  the night because of the lack of electricity'. Others who have taken refuge in evacuation centres also express similar  sentiments.  Hundreds of people are still waiting for food and blankets - with  many centres reporting that one or two stoves had to be shared making life  miserable and stressful for the very young and aged in the freezing weather. Due to broken roads making access difficult, the affected areas have no  gasoline, which is hampering rescue operations.  The death toll has climbed to  5,500 with more than 10,000 still missing. For professor Yasuo Kawawaki, head of the International Recovery Platform,  that is well-known for its work on global disaster reduction, the current tragic  pictures illustrates not only the enormity of the crisis that has hit the country  but also an important lesson learning experience. 'The crisis is multiple and we were not prepared sufficiently,' Kawawaki  explained.  'It is not only the quake that has hit the area but also an  unprecedented high tsunami and also the worst nuclear power accident. 'Commentators opine that the current situation vividly exposes the  vulnerability of the country - a sobering evaluation for the public that had  gotten used to being a world economic power, boasting state-of-the-art  infrastructure and almost fool-proof efficiency. Kawawaki estimates the recovery process to be daunting given the hundreds  of thousands of people who have lost their loved ones, homes, and jobs in the  area.  Tokyo, the capital, is also affected with power shortages that are forcing  shorter workdays, closing offices and shops. 'Research on disaster planning and emergencies are huge in Japan but we  now realise that what we have is still not sufficient,' said Kawawaki. Still, points out Koichi Ishiyama, who works in international finance, Japan is a  rich economy with an affluent population, large trade surplus, technical  expertise and liquidity that provides a stable platform as the country enters  the recovery phase.  'The process will take several decades given the huge  set-back.  But at least I believe we have a solid foundation,' he said. For the moment though, Japan is engulfed in the huge emergency stage of  the crisis.  As Masaru Shigemoto got on the bus this afternoon to leave for  Tochigi - 100 kilometres out of Fukushima - he told television crews he is  leaving with a heavy heart.  'I was born and reared in this city which is now  devastated by the nuclear explosion.  I want to return but I am not sure  whether it will be during my lifetime. '