When the environmentally-threatened Indian Ocean island of  Maldives 'graduated' from the ranks of least developed  countries (LDCs) to a middle-income country last January, the  graduation was characterised as a milestone in the country's  socioeconomic development. But was it a cause for celebration in the streets of the  capital of Male?'Not really,' says Ambassador Abdul Ghafoor Mohamed,  permanent representative of Maldives to the United Nations. The graduation is not without costs, he said, even as the  cash-strapped country tries to cope with 'staggering'  unemployment, a rising debt burden and little or no capital  to invest in development programmes. 'We have graduated when we can least afford it,' Mohamed  told IPS, as the Maldives is still struggling to recover  from the 2004 tsunami that wiped out about 60 percent of the  island's economy, which is dependent primarily on fishing  and tourism. The major benefits of LDC status include trade preferences -  mostly duty-free LDC exports to industrial nations - and the  increased volume of official development assistance (ODA)  from Western donors. The benefits fall into four main areas, according to the  United Nations, and include preferential market access;  special treatment regarding World Trade Organization-related  obligations; technical cooperation; and financial support  for participation of LDC representatives at U. N.  meetings  and the General Assembly sessions. Last week, at a briefing focusing on the negative impact of  'graduation' - and sponsored by the Maldives in  collaboration with the Office of the U. N.  High  Representative for LDCs - the Maldivian envoy made a plea  for a 'smooth transition' in order to prevent economic  hardships for graduating countries. The existing benefits, he said, should be gradually phased  out, not cut off abruptly. Mohamed made a case not only for his own country but also  for countries that are due for graduation shortly. When the U. N.  General Assembly decided in 1971 to create a  new category of LDCs, there were only 25 who were deemed the  poorest of the world's poor.  Currently, there are 48 LDCs -  33 in Africa, 14 in Asia and one in the Caribbean - and  comprising over 800 million people. The LDCs range from Angola, Afghanistan and Benin to Bhutan,  Uganda and Zambia. Botswana was the first LDC to graduate back in 1994, and  since then only two other countries have graduated: Cape  Verde and the Maldives. The Maldives was originally due to graduate in 2007.  But due  to the tsunami disaster of December 2004, the General  Assembly deferred its graduation by three years through  January 2011. A fourth country that is expected to graduate is Samoa,  scheduled for 2014. The U. N. 's Committee for Development Policy (CDP) sits in  judgment over the status of LDCs, and its decisions are  eventually endorsed by the General Assembly. A Programme of Action to be adopted at the Fourth U. N.   Conference on LDCs, due to take place in Istanbul, Turkey in  May, seeks to reduce the number of LDCs by almost 50  percent: around 24 countries in the next decade. But in a 'concept paper' on graduation, the United Nations  admits that despite the 'widespread recognition of the  importance of smooth transition, a coherent process of the  phasing out and eventual cessation of special measures  granted to LDCs, identified for graduation, is yet to be  established as part of the institutional framework for  graduation. 'Given the objectives of the Istanbul Programme of Action to  make graduation a priority, the paper points out, 'the need  to address the current inadequacies of the institutional  framework and processes related to smooth transition becomes  all the more important and urgent. 'Addressing delegates at last week's briefing, the Maldivian  envoy pointed out his country has met five of the eight  Millennium Development Goals (MDGs), with increased  expenditures on health and education, with the support of  the international community. But the lack of smooth transition during graduation, he  warned, may jeopardise his country's progress towards  achieving all of the MDGs. 'Scratch the surface of the pool of aggregate data that  paints a rosy picture, and you will see that the extent of  Maldives development successes are concentrated in the  capital region of the country,' he said. 'However, the capital area still endures issues of poverty,  a concentration of poverty in the outer atolls has yet to be  addressed, while a still unacceptable malnutrition rate of  over 14 percent, and staggering unemployment rates and  social challenges that confront our young people, erect  barriers for a real future in the global economy,' he noted. It is clear, Mohamed said, that making inroads on the  remaining MDGs will require expanding the social services  and development programmes that enabled Maldives to meet the  criteria for graduation. 'Moreover, our ability to mute the challenges to our  development posed by geography and climate change will  require real investment in critical social infrastructure to  facilitate poverty alleviation in the outer islands,' he  declared. But much of this will be difficult to accomplish in the  foreseeable future. A rise in sea level caused by climate change has threatened  to 'wipe the country off the face of the earth' perhaps in  the next couple of decades, driving Maldivians to be  'environmental refugees' of the future. Mohamed said the increases in spending, along with the costs  of political transformation towards democracy, have resulted  in high levels of total public debt. According to the U. N.  Development Programme (UNDP), public  debt has almost doubled over the last six years: from 55  percent in 2004 to an estimated 97 percent of gross domestic  product (GDP) in 2010. Worse, the country will have little capital to invest in  development programmes and employment creation, and will  have little maneuver room to weather economic shocks like  those experienced this decade, he added. Meanwhile, the United Nations has held three major global  conferences on LDCs: the first and second in Paris in 1981  and 1991, and the third in Brussels in 2001 - all of them  aimed at mobilising global support for the upliftment of  LDCs. 