The unfolding disaster at Japan’s Fukushima Daiichi Nuclear Power Plant has  reignited debate over Taiwan’s own nuclear power programme and the  controversy over continuing construction of a fourth nuclear facility here. In the wake of the earthquake and devastating tsunami that struck eastern  Japan Mar.  11, President Ma Ying-jeou, who is also chairman of the ruling  right-wing Chinese Nationalist Party (Kuomintang or KMT), remains firm on  one of the areas of most concern to Taiwan citizens - the future use and  expansion of nuclear power in Taiwan. After a briefing at the Atomic Energy Council Mar.  15, Ma declared that there  was no need to cease operations of the existing three nuclear plants, and  stated that construction of a controversial fourth facility should continue. 'There should be a national citizen referendum before fuel is loaded in  ‘Nuclear Four’,' Kao Cheng-yen, former president of the Taiwan  Environmental Protection Union, told IPS. 'The government is only telling us to be calm and not to worry,' said Taipei  Association for the Promotion of Women’s Rights Secretary-General Karen  Cheng. Taiwan’s three nuclear plants supply about one-fifth of the island country’s  electricity. The three facilities, located respectively in Chinshan and Kuosheng in  northern Taiwan, and Maanshan at the southern tip of the island, have four  General Electric designed boiling water reactors similar to those operating at  Fukushima and two Westinghouse pressurised water reactors. The three plants entered operation in the late 1970s and early 1980s during  the four-decade long period of authoritarian martial law imposed by the KMT  regime.  The plants are currently scheduled to end service in late 2017, late  2018, and late 2024. The fourth plant, now being built by Taipower in Yenliao Township, New  Taipei City, on Taiwan’s northeastern coast at an estimated cost of over nine  billion dollars, has been bitterly opposed by a majority of local residents,  environmental activists and the opposition Democratic Progressive Party  (DPP). The former DPP government had briefly suspended construction of ‘Nuclear  Four’ in October 2000, but this decision was overruled by the KMT-controlled  national legislature in February 2001 after which construction resumed. In the wake of the Fukushima crisis, environmental activists and DPP  legislators reissued calls for a revaluation of the use of nuclear power and a  suspension of construction of ‘Nuclear Four’. 'Countries that are more advanced or more backward than Taiwan are  cautiously reviewing their nuclear power policies, but our government is  acting like an ostrich and maintaining that everything is safe,' DPP Legislator  Huang Wei-cheh told IPS. Senior government officials and spokespersons for the state-owned Taipower  have issued assurances of the safety of the existing facilities and the design  of ‘Nuclear Four’. Speaking at a cabinet news conference Mar.  17, Atomic Energy Council  Director-General Tsai Hung-chun assured citizens that his agency would not  approve loading of fuel into ‘Nuclear Four’ until all 66 critical systems passed  inspection. During a media tour of ‘Nuclear One’ Mar.  15, Chinshan Nuclear Power Plant  Deputy Chief Wu Tsai-chi and other Taipower officials showed reporters that  the facility was protected from possible tsunami waves up to 23 metres  thanks to its location in the hills off the coast. Moreover, Wu explained that the plant’s emergency power supply had greater  redundancy than the Fukushima plant thanks to two 40 megawatt oil-fuelled  gas turbines and an emergency four megawatt diesel generator that could  power water cooling systems for the reactors. If these systems and the plant’s emergency core cooling system  malfunctioned, Wu stated that there was also a 100,000 ton fresh water  reservoir above the facility that could flood the reactors through gravity if  power systems failed. However, the tour also revealed possible blind spots. A brochure on the Chinshan facility acknowledged five possible threats to the  plant’s safety - fire, internal incidents, seismic shocks, floods and typhoons.   Furthermore, the storage pool for cooling spent fuel rods - similar to the one  in the troubled Fukushima facility - lies outside the nuclear reactor vessel,  and thus outside the protection of the emergency water reservoir. Under questioning in Taiwan’s national legislature Mar.  17, Taipower  Chairman Chen Kui-ming told KMT Legislator Chen Chieh that the state- owned power company would 'study the Fukushima experience' and make  safety improvements. According to DPP Legislator Tien Chiu-chin, the ‘Nuclear Four’ project suffers  from a long list of concerns, including over 700 arbitrary design changes  without GE’s permission, insufficient earthquake protection to withstand a  seven magnitude earthquake, proximity to recently discovered active  undersea volcanoes and faults.  She also said the plant is suffering from poor  management by Taipower, which is directly managing construction, unlike the  previous plants which were supervised by GE and Westinghouse. Civic confidence in the crisis-management capabilities of the government  and Taipower is low.  A poll of 1,202 on Mar.  14 found that 55 percent lacked  confidence in the safety of Taiwan’s nuclear power plants, compared to 29  percent who had confidence. In addition, 65 percent of the respondents said that they had little or no  confidence in the KMT government’s crisis response capability, compared to  21 percent who trusted the government’s crisis management skills. A survey of 1,112 Taiwan adults conducted by the DPP released Mar.  17  showed that 76. 5 percent agreed that construction of ‘Nuclear Four’ should  be suspended pending a comprehensive review of its safety design and  engineering quality, while 18. 6 percent disagreed. Public opinion was split on Ma’s statements that 'nuclear power plants in  operation did not need to cease operating'. DPP Public Survey Department Director Chen Chun-lin stated that, 'as the  public has a high degree of doubt about nuclear safety, President Ma should  not have rashly issued such an important announcement but should first  listen to the public will and carefully reconsider. 'Meanwhile, residents and environmentalists are mobilising to launch a  renewed drive to halt ‘Nuclear Four’. Over 100 Yenliao residents held a rally in front of the Executive Yuan  (Cabinet) building in Taipei on the morning of Mar.  17 to call on the Ma  government to 'cease the extremely risky nuclear power development policy'. Yenliao Anti-Nuclear Self-Help Association spokesman Wu Wen-tung stated  that, 'the problem is not how many spare generators a plant has or how many  metres high its anti-tsunami sea wall is, but the reality that nuclear power is a  highly risky system that science and technology still cannot fully control. '