A global nuclear disaster potentially worse than Chernobyl may  be under way in Japan as hundreds of tonnes of highly  radioactive spent nuclear fuel are open to the sky, and may be  on fire and emitting radioactive particles into the  atmosphere. Many countries have advised their citizens in Japan to leave  the country. 'This is uncharted territory.  There is a 50-percent chance  they could lose all six reactors and their storage pools,'  said Jan Beyea, a nuclear physicist with a New Jersey  consulting firm called Consulting in the Public Interest. 'I'm surprised the situation hasn't gotten worse faster. . .   But without a breakthrough it's only a matter of days before  spent fuels will melt down,' said Ed Lyman, a physicist at  the Union of Concerned Scientists and an expert on nuclear  plant design. Japan's Fukushima Daiichi plant was damaged by a powerful  earthquake and tsunami on Mar.  11.  It has an estimated 1,700  tonnes of used or spent but still dangerous nuclear fuel in  storage pools next to its six nuclear reactors, according to  Kevin Kamps, a radioactive waste specialist at Beyond  Nuclear, a U. S.  anti-nuclear environmental group. The storage pools holding 30 to 35 years worth of spent fuel  at reactors No.  3 and No.  4 have lost containment and most  if not all of their coolant water.  They may be on fire,  venting radioactive particles into the atmosphere, Kamps  told IPS. On Thursday, Japanese military helicopters protected by lead  shielding managed to dump some seawater on the damaged  reactors No.  3 and No.  4 in a desperate and very risky last- ditch effort at the highly radioactive site. 'If some of the spent fuel ignites and propagates throughout  the rest of the fuel enormous areas of Japan could be  contaminated by radioactive caesium 137 for 30 to 50 years,'  Beyea told IPS. Caesium 137 remains radioactive for more than a hundred  years and is a known cause of cancer and other health  impacts.  Once released, it is very difficult to cope with.   Caesium is why a large region around the 1986 Chernobyl  nuclear disaster remains uninhabitable 25 years later. A 2010 health study by the University of South Carolina in  the U. S.  showed that children born after the disaster and  living more than 75 kilometres away have long-term problems  with their lungs resulting from caesium 137 in dust and soil  particles. 'Caesium particles were blown hundreds of miles away during  the intense fire at Chernobyl,' Kamp said. For comparison, Chernobyl held 180 tonnes of nuclear fuel.   Fukushima Daiichi has 560 tonnes of nuclear fuel in its  reactors along with 1,700 tonnes of spent fuel. 'The nuclear industry in Japan and the U. S.  knew the loss of  coolant at spent-fuel storage pools would be a big problem  but they simply said it couldn't happen,' said Beyea, who is  a co-author of a 2004 study on this very topic for the U. S.   National Research Council of the National Academy of  Sciences. Having worked in the industry, Beyea says it is run by  overconfident engineers who minimise or ignore low- probability disasters even if they might have huge  consequences. Nuclear reactors generate enormous amounts of heat and must  be constantly cooled to keep the metal fuel casing from  catching on fire and the fuel from melting.  Since a nuclear  reaction cannot be turned off, when spent fuel is removed  from a reactor it still generates a great deal of heat and  must be cooled underwater for five to 20 years.  All reactors  have storage pools with thick reinforced-concrete walls and  are about 15 metres deep, containing around 1. 5 million  litres of water.   This water soon warms and must be  constantly replaced with cooler water. The loss of electricity and failures of backup generators at  Fukushima Daiichi has meant little water has been pumped  through the storage pools or into the reactors.  Radiation  levels inside the plant have now climbed so high that it is  hazardous for workers to try to keep jury-rigged pumps  pumping sea water.  Normally only fresh water is used because  sea water contains salts that eventually degrade the metals. Radiation levels are deadly when there is not enough water  to cover a spent fuel pool, said Kamps.  'It will be very  difficult to get close enough to cool these pools down,' he  noted.  'If the worst happens, and the six pools burn, it  will be an unimaginable disaster.  It could be worse than  Chernobyl. 'The amount of caesium that could be released at Fuskushima  is many thousands times that from the Hiroshima atomic bomb  during World War Two, acknowledged Beyea.  However, it was  the bomb blast that killed over 120,000 people in the  immediate months afterwards, he said. 'Japan is facing enormous potential impacts on its economy,  its society and on the health of its people,' he said,  adding that people will be worried sick about the potential  impacts on their health for decades to come. 'We recommended that the nuclear industry move spent fuel  into dry storage containers after five years to reduce this  risk but they said a loss-of-pool coolant event would never  happen,' said Beyea. The status as of Thursday, 4 pm EST according to Tokyo  Electric, the owner and operator of Fukushima Daiichi  nuclear plant:Reactors No.  1, No.  2 and No.  3 nuclear cores have partially  melted as they lost cooling functions after the quake. Reactor No.  2 containment vessel suffered damage and has  been breached. The buildings housing the No.  1, No.  3 and No.  4 reactors  and storage pools have been severely damaged by apparent  hydrogen blasts. Water levels and temperatures at storage pools of the Nos.  1  to 4 units are unknown. Temperatures at storage pools at No.  5 and No.  6 are  climbing. 