Despite deep historic tensions between the two Asian powers, a surge of  sympathy has emerged among Chinese toward victims of last week’s earthquake  and resulting tsunami in northern Japan, which has left an estimated 10,000  dead or missing. These feelings of sympathy have so far drowned out other emotions - among  them a darker one, which sees the twin catastrophes as some sort of karma  for the many wartime atrocities Japan has inflicted on China. 'Because of our history, I have a bad impression of Japanese people,' Zhang  Wei, a 28-year-old teacher here, told IPS.  'So when I first heard the news I  was sort of happy.  I thought they deserved it. ''But then I saw the images on television,' Zhang stressed.  'I saw children, so  many people dead, so many people missing, and I felt very uncomfortable.   Very sad.  I had no idea it was that serious. 'Discussion of the quake and its aftermath has been among the hottest topics  on China’s leading micro-blog service, ‘Sina Weibo’, and is one of the highest  trending topics on ‘Baidu’, China’s leading search engine. According to an online poll conducted by ‘Sina Weibo’ and the Chinese social  networking website ‘Kaixin001’, 68 percent of respondents, or 2,827 people,  said they were 'praying' for the quake and tsunami victims.  Seventeen percent  said they had no feelings about the disaster. According to a report in ‘Global Times’, a state-owned newspaper, tens of  thousands of Chinese have left messages at popular news portals 163. com  and sina. com expressing sympathy for victims.  Many netizens have called on  their countrymen to put aside their differences with Japan and pray for the  victims. 'The Japanese haven’t done anything wrong.  They are different from Japanese  soldiers,' one user wrote on a ‘NetEase’ web forum.  'You can hate those  soldiers, but there is no reason to hate common Japanese people. ''If fighting with Japanese soldiers, I will hold a submachine gun and be on the  front lines,' wrote one commentator going by the name Zhangzxin8511.   'Now, after the earthquake I will be the first to hold a stretcher if they need  my help.  Let’s pray for Japan. 'Some Chinese netizens have launched efforts to track down the missing.   ‘Weibo’, the leading Twitter-like micro-blogging service, launched a platform  over the weekend to helps users search for family and friends in Japan. But these sentiments are by no means universal. 'I’ll never forget the Japanese war against China.  They killed so many people,'  Wei Peng, a 23-year-old student at Beijing Foreign Studies University, told  IPS.  'They deserve it. 'This sentiment reflects deep tensions that remain between the two  neighbours, rooted in Japan’s invasion and occupation of parts of China from  1931 to 1945.  Japanese atrocities against China are often depicted in Chinese  film and television. In September, the two countries quarrelled in a territorial dispute over the  Diaoyu Islands.  Japan held a Chinese trawler captain after his fishing boat  collided with Japanese coast guard vessels near the islands, prompting Beijing  to cancel diplomatic meetings until his release. Negative reaction to the quake in Japan sparked a backlash among Chinese  netizens, calling into question the naked nationalism of some commentators.   'How many Japanese would write, ‘Congratulations on the Wenchuan  earthquake’?' said one commentator on the ‘Weibo’ homepage - referring to  the 2008 Sichuan quake that killed an estimated 80,000 people. The Chinese government has set aside tensions.  It has sent a 15-member  highly trained emergency rescue team to Oofunato, a Japanese city heavily  damage by the quake.  Several team members participated in rescue missions  following the Indonesian tsunami and earthquakes in Sichuan, Haiti and  Pakistan. The School of Journalism and Communications at Jinan University in  Guangzhou conducted a random survey of 505 Guangzhou residents and  found that 90 percent supported the decision to send a Chinese emergency  team to Japan and 80 percent agreed China should supply more assistance,  the ‘Guangdong Daily’ reported. The Red Cross Society of China pledged to donate one million RMB (152,000  dollars) in emergency funds to its counterpart in Japan. Earlier this week, Chinese Premier Wen Jiabao offered 'deep condolences' to  the Japanese people.  'China is also a country prone to earthquake disasters  and we fully empathise with how they feel now.  We will provide more as Japan  needs it and we want to continue to help as necessary,' Wen said. The government is also trying to quell growing fears here of nuclear radiation  drifting from Japan, after explosions and fires at the severely damaged  Fukushima Daiichi plant. Anonymous text messages have been circulating in China warning of  radiation.  The Sina Weibo/Kaixin001 poll found that 82 percent of all  respondents were worried about nuclear radiation. Zhang said the dominant topic of discussion at her school is of radiation drift.   'The government says we’re safe, so I’ve started to relax a bit.  But I’ve seen  American movies about what happens to victims of radiation.  So of course I’m  still a little worried. 'Coastal municipalities in China have begun monitoring radiation levels and  aviation officials in Shenyang and Dalian cities have begun checking exposure  levels of incoming passengers on flights from Japan, according to state media. China’s has six nuclear power facilities currently in operation, but has  suspended approvals for any new nuclear plants and said it will revise its  safety standards. 