When the international community commemorates World Water Day  next week, perhaps it should ponder the words of U. N.   Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, who once remarked he does not  expect people world over to stop what they are doing and  observe a moment of silence, come Mar.  22. 'But maybe they should,' he added, considering the fact that  every 20 seconds, a child dies from diseases associated with  lack of clean water. 'That adds up to an unconscionable 1. 5 million young lives  cut short each year,' said Ban.  By 2025, 1. 8 billion people will be living in countries or  regions with absolute water scarcity, and two-thirds of the  world population could be living under stress conditions,  according to U. N.  Water, a coalition comprising  representatives of 24 U. N.  organisations. Currently, about 70 percent of the world's fresh water is  used for irrigation, 22 percent for industry and about eight  percent for domestic use. The U. N.  children's agency UNICEF points out that over 884  million people worldwide do not have access to safe water,  while 2. 6 billion have no access to adequate sanitation in a  growing world population of over six billion people. Maude Barlow, co-founder of the Blue Planet Project, which  campaigns for the universal right to water, told IPS that  while demand is fast outstripping supply, 'We must come  together this World Water Day to commit to a new  relationship with water. 'Asked how, she said: 'By conserving it, restoring  watersheds, protecting source water from pollution - which  must be viewed as a criminal act - and sharing it more  equitably for all humans, the future and for other species  as well. 'Anders Berntell, executive director of the Stockholm  International Water Institute (SIWI), warns about the  potential dangers of the world undergoing rapid  urbanisation. 'People, ideas and commodities are intensively mobilising  from peripheries to economic centres, where architectural  wonders tower over skylines while slums continue to grow in  their shadows,' he said. By 2050, he predicts, more people will live in cities than  the number of people living in the entire world today. The theme of this year's annual World Water Week in the  Swedish capital of Stockholm, scheduled to take place Aug.   21-27, will be 'Responding to Global Changes: Water in an  Urbanising World. 'Berntell said improved urban planning of water use and re- use can contribute significantly to reducing social and  economic tensions within, between and around cities, in an  increasingly variable water future. In a statement released Friday, the Washington-based WASH  Advocacy Initiative praised legislation introduced in the  U. S.  Senate Thursday that would put the United States in the  lead in responding to the worldwide safe drinking water and  sanitation crisis.    The 'Senator Paul Simon Water for the World Act of 2011'  would commit the United States to extending safe, affordable  and sustainable supplies of drinking water and sanitation to  100 million people within six years, it said. 'This major bipartisan initiative would put the United  States at the forefront of addressing the Millennium  Development Goals (MDGs) for drinking water and sanitation',  according to the statement. Barlow told IPS the major cause of the present water crisis  is that 'modern humans see water as a great big resource for  our pleasure, convenience and profit and not as the  essential element of a living ecosystem that gives us all  life. ''So we pollute it.  We dump an amount of industrial and human  waste into the watersheds every year equivalent to the  combined weight of all humanity, pump water from watersheds  and rivers into mega cities where, if they are anywhere near  the ocean, it is then dumped as waste - a major cause of  rising oceans,' she said. Additionally, 'We grow crops with flood irrigation in  deserts; poison it with mining, nuclear, fracking and tar  sands production, and let it drain away from ancient rusting  pipes because we have 'run out of money' for public  infrastructure,' said Barlow, a former U. N.  Senior Adviser  on Water.  Asked what role the United Nations should play in resolving  the ongoing crisis, she said the world body has already  started with the recognition of water and sanitation as a  human right, which means that every government must now come  up with a plan of action based on the 'Obligation to  Protect, Respect, and Fulfill' this right. And now the United Nations must turn its attention to water  conservation and watershed restoration, and to finding ways  to make water a means of peace, not conflict, she noted. 'We need to declare water to be a common heritage, a public  trust and a public service, and we need to support the  government of Bolivia in its new move to declare that water  must be protected as a public right and not allowed to be  delivered on a for profit basis by the private sector,'  Barlow said. Simply put, she said: 'We need water for life.  Water can  teach us how to live in harmony with one another and more  lightly on this earth if we have eyes to see and ears to  hear. '