Accidents at four nuclear power reactors hit by the earthquake and tsunami in  Fukushima have left thousands of residents in the vicinity facing an uncertain  future as they prepare for evacuation orders to protect them from dangerous  radiation contamination. Fear and anger at the growing vulnerability of their situation has also  hardened public opposition to nuclear power in Japan, with more people  calling for a review of Japan’s much touted safety technology towards policies  supporting alternative energy sources. Nuclear power from 54 operating reactors provides 30 percent of local energy  needs.  Coal, oil and other sources provide the rest.  Japan, a resource poor  country, has staked its economic future on nuclear power.  Given its almost  negligent carbon dioxide emissions nuclear power is becoming more  important in light of climate change as well. In a blow to Japan’s nuclear industry, Katsutaka Idogawa, mayor of Futabacho,  a hamlet that borders the Daicihi Fukushima power plant, told the press  Tuesday that it is high time the local population begins to move away from its  dependency on the nuclear plant that they host. 'The disaster has shown us we must review our policy of accepting the  nuclear power plant.  We must develop new ideas to have other industries to  bring us a stable economy,' he said in an article published by the ‘Asahi  Newspaper’, a leading daily. The 7,000 people of Futabacho are, however, involved with the Daiichi  Fukushima nuclear power plant - employed either as workers or in other  operations.  The village is located 10 kilometres away from the 20-kilometre  exclusion zone demarcated by the government. The latest count of people leaving Fukushima numbers 25,000, according to  local authorities.  They join the overall 350,000 evacuees leaving other badly  damaged areas to restart their lives in other localities that have begun  accepting the disaster displaced populations. Ayako Ooga, 38, and her husband are one of the affected families.  The couple  who live in Ookuma-machi, just six kilometres from the Fukushima nuclear  power plant, said they left the night of the quake that struck on Mar.  11 -  mostly because of fear about radiation contamination.  'Our house was  damaged but we have always been more concerned about safety of the  nuclear plant.  With the accident we face a bleak future,' she told IPS. Ooga, however, says she supports the statements made by Idogawa, mostly  because he voiced opposition to supporting nuclear power and illustrated  sharply the anxiety and suspicion in the community that is in the process of  evacuating. 'I found some hope when Idogawa explained he would lead the evacuation  which means so much to us now,' she said.  Ooga is from a farming  community and had just built a new home which she wonders now whether  she will ever be able to visit. Idogawa said he would lead the first batch of 1,500 people from his village  who will settle down in Saitama prefecture, a northern border town of Tokyo.   He also said his decision will pave the way for the rest of the community to  join them and start their lives again as before till they can return together. Experts explain the relocation process is always painful for people and is  especially so for the thousands who must leave for safety from the threat of  radiation contamination and face the probability of not being able to return  for a long time. 'The situation is a human tragedy,' said professor Toshikata Katada, a  disaster expert at Nagoya University.  Katada has covered the earthquake  prone region to develop hazard maps and other emergency measures for  several decades, explained on television the experts had just not been  prepared. 'Our preparedness showed us how knowledge is pitted against the vagaries of  nature.  This time we see how nature won,' he said. Reports released Tuesday indicate radiation levels are 1,600 times the normal  level 20 kilometres from the crippled Fukushima plant, according to the  International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA). IAEA experts arrived in Tokyo Friday after controversy erupted over differing  radiation readings released by the Japanese government and foreign  counterparts - raising suspicion that authorities may have created panic in  some cities where people wiped out food supplies overnight. Another alarming development was released today when the government said  it detected high levels of radioactive material in seawater near the Fukushima  power plant fanning concern over fishery products from the area. Tokyo Electric Power Company, reported radioactive material was detected  Monday in the seawater samples at levels 126. 7 times higher than the legal  concentration limit.  Levels of cesium 137, a radioactive material which can be  dormant in the air for over 30 years, was 16. 5 times higher than the limit,  while trace amount of cobalt 58 was detected in a sample of seawater near  the plant as well. Already, spinach and milk from farms in Fukushima are showing high  radiation levels and will not be allowed for consumer sale. The critical situation is causing anxiety in areas where other plants are located  as well.  Chubu Electrical Power Company that operates the Hamaoka nuclear  power plant in Omaezaki, Shizuoka prefecture, 150 kilometres south of Tokyo  - also identified as a quake prone area - announced Tuesday that it will get  an emergency diesel generator in case of power loss due to tsunami. Meanwhile, local residents express alarm at the situation which is still out of  hand in Fukushima more than a week after the earthquake hit.  Minoru Ito, a  local activist, told IPS that his phone keeps ringing as people keep calling him  wondering what they should do now.  'The ongoing tragedy in Fukushima  sends chills down our spines,' he says. 