Canadian Kevin Freedman is celebrating World Water Day Tuesday  by living on 25 litres of water a day, instead of the North  American average of 330 litres per day.   And he has enlisted  31 others in his 'Water Conservation Challenge' to go water- lean, using just 25 litres per day for cooking, drinking,  cleaning, and sanitation for the entire month of March. 'People in Canada and the U. S.  have no idea how much water  they use or how much they waste,' Freedman told IPS. 'Although people live on less, it is very difficult to use  just 25 litres a day.  You can't shower or use a washing  machine,' he said.  'I'm hoping to raise awareness that water  is a finite resource. 'Nearly a billion people don't have good access to safe fresh  water.  In a single generation, that number could double as  growing demands for water will exceed the available and  sustainable supply by 40 percent, according a recent study.   'Peak water' has already come and gone.  Humanity uses more  water than can be sustained, drawing on non-renewable  reserves of water accumulated over thousands of years in  deep aquifers. 'Water cannot be created, it can only by managed,' said  Margaret Catley-Carlson, a former senior official with both  the Canadian government and at the United Nations, a  renowned global authority on water issues, and a director at  the Canadian Water Network. In many countries and regions water scarcity is a  fundamental challenge to development, Catley-Carlson told  IPS.  A lack of access to water can lead to starvation,  disease, political instability and even armed conflict. 'Governments see their role as delivering water to the  public and industry,' she said.  'This has to change to  sustainably managing water resources for society and the  natural environment. 'Policy-makers haven't treated water as a valuable resource  and as a result water is wasted, with leaky water  infrastructure losing 20 to 50 percent of the water it is  supposed to deliver.   Even water-poor countries in the  global south don't make water a top priority because water  availability is mainly an issue for women and the poor and  they are not well represented in government, she said.   Instead limited public funds are spent on things like the  military and other priorities. 'It is so frustrating,' she said.  'We can do without oil but  we can't do without water. 'On Tuesday, U. N.  Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon urged  governments to make pro-poor investments in water and  sanitation, particularly in urban areas where the need is  acute and has grown by 20 percent in the last decade. This is 'a crisis of governance, weak policies and poor  management, rather than one of scarcity,' Ban said in a  statement. As the world population and economy grows, the water  challenge becomes all the greater.  By 2030 the global water  demand will be 40 percent greater than today's 'accessible,  reliable, environmentally sustainable supply' according to  the U. S. -led study 'Charting Our Water Future' by  consultants McKinsey and Company. About one-third of the population, concentrated in  developing countries, will live in basins where this water  deficit is larger than 50 percent, the report found. Agriculture accounts for approximately 71 percent of global  water withdrawals today and the water challenge is closely  tied to food provision, the study notes.  Inefficient and  inappropriate irrigation accounts for much of this water  use.  Thirsty crops like maize are grown in dry places like  Spain, requiring enormous amounts of irrigated water.  Even a  low-value crop like sugar cane is grown under irrigation in  some places, which Catley-Carlson calls 'ludicrous'. Poor policies, subsidies, such as those for biofuels, trade  agreements and bad habits are collectively responsible for  much of the world's water misuse in food production, she  says. Domestic water use is just eight percent of overall water  consumption.  Industrial use is the other major user of  water.  All products have a water component, often called  'virtual water', to describe the volume used to make  something. 'A desktop computer, for example, requires 1. 5 tonnes (1,500  litres) of water; a pair of denim jeans, up to six tonnes; a  kilogramme of wheat, one tonne; a kilo of chicken, three to  four tonnes; a kilo of beef, 15 to 30 tonnes,' says Nicholas  Parker, chairman of the Cleantech Group, an international  firm that works to accelerate the development and market  adoption of clean technologies. The annual global trade in 'virtual water' today is said to  exceed 800 billion tonnes, the equivalent of 10 Nile Rivers. 'What people don't often realise is how much water there is  in everything we make and buy, from t-shirts to wine,' says  Parker. Everyone can become a better steward of water no matter who  they are, says Kevin Freedman.  The lessons learned through  the month-long 25-a-litre-a-day water diet can be applied  all year round, he says. 'Everyone in North America can reduce their water use by at  least 25 litres.  I challenge people to make a pledge to do  it,' Parker says. 