The United States government has been accused of failing to  read growing public concern about the future of the country's  atomic energy programme, as the crisis at Japan's stricken  Fukushima nuclear plant continues to unfold. Although President Barack Obama has ordered a review into  the safety of U. S.  plants in the wake of the Japanese  disaster, he has continued to reaffirm his commitment to  nuclear power as 'an important part of our energy future'. However, a new survey released this week by the nonpartisan  Civil Society Institute (CSI) found a majority of U. S.   citizens back moving away from nuclear power. The poll of more than 800 people showed 53 percent of the  respondents would support a freeze on new nuclear reactor  construction, in favour of renewable technologies such as  wind and solar. There was also majority support for ending additional  federal loan guarantees for new reactors, and eliminating  the indemnification of the nuclear power industry from most  post-disaster cleanup costs. 'The survey findings suggest that Americans would like to  see the brakes applied to more nuclear power,' said Graham  Hueber, from research company ORC International. 'This goes beyond the simple gut-level question of whether  nuclear power is supported or opposed,' he added.  'When  Americans are asked about their views on specific policy  questions that go to the future of nuclear power, there is  majority support across the board on every question for  moving away from greater reliance on this power source. 'In the 2012 budget, President Obama has requested an  additional 36 billion dollars in loan guarantees for new  reactors in the U. S. , to add to the 104 already in operation  across the country. Against the backdrop of the unfolding disaster in Japan,  where engineers continue to battle against nuclear meltdown,  environmental advocates have questioned the U. S.   government's unwavering commitment to atomic energy. 'The fact is you've got these nuclear power companies that  have very concentrated and effective lobbying campaigns,'  Tyson Slocum, director of the Public Citizen's Energy  Programme, told IPS. 'A perfect example is the Democratic National Convention to  be held in the summer of 2012 to re-nominate Barrack Obama  as his party's nominee for president.  You have a nuclear  power utility called Duke Energy that is fronting 10 million  dollars for that (convention).  You don't see that with solar  or wind companies. 'While nuclear companies in the U. S.  have attempted to re- label atomic power as a clean solution to global warming,  green groups say the recent public polls supporting  alternative technologies should be the catalyst for a  renewed debate about transitioning from nuclear energy. 'Clearly, Americans don't want their tax dollars used to  support the expansion of dangerous and unnecessary nuclear  power when we have clean renewable energy that we can deploy  now,' Jim Riccio, nuclear policy analyst for Greenpeace USA,  told IPS. 'We know that investing in real solutions like energy  efficiency and wind and solar power would reduce emissions  faster, create millions of jobs, and wouldn't put  communities at risk of the inherent dangers of nuclear  power.  How long will President Obama and some in Congress  maintain their deference to nuclear industry lobbyists in  the face of this widespread opposition?' he asked. Pam Solo, founder of CSI, said while Obama has long been a  proponent of nuclear energy as a way to reduce coal-based  greenhouse gases, public concern about the risks was  mounting.  'There is increasing momentum for energy efficiency and off- the-shelf renewable technologies, which can, over time and  with concerted leadership and planning, replace these  dangerous and unsustainable energy choices,' she told IPS. 'However, the Obama administration has made reducing CO2  [carbon dioxide, a potent greenhouse gas] its primary  objective at the expense of leading toward an energy path  that could protect communities, the environment and people's  health while also reducing greenhouse gas emissions,' Solo  said. 'It is going to require a willingness to step outside the  influence of the coal, oil and nuclear energy lobbies.    Right now, the policy debate is really held hostage by  special interests,' she added. In Japan, the death toll from the recent earthquake and  tsunami has risen past 9,000, with a further 13,500 people  still missing.  However, international media attention has  largely been focused on the stricken nuclear plantsAccording to Slocum, in light of the events at Fukushima,  the U. S.  government's continued commitment to nuclear power  amounts to hedging on public safety. 'They're just assuming that the risks are so small as to not  be a major consideration,' he told IPS.  'But we think the  risks given the implications of a disaster are too great to  ignore. 'The Japanese are arguably the best prepared to deal with  earthquakes, yet they failed to adequately plan for the  impact of a tsunami,' Slocum said.  'This demonstrates the  difficulty in planning for both the 'known unknowns' and  'unknown unknowns' that impact nuclear reactors from natural  disaster and terrorism. 'Last year, the Nuclear Regulatory Commission launched 14  special inspections in response to 'near misses' at U. S.   nuclear plants, a figure the Union of Concerned Scientists  (UCS) says is a cause for concern. 'While none of the safety problems in 2010 caused harm to  plant employees or the public, their frequency - more than  one per month - is high for a mature industry,' said David  Lochbaum, the director of UCS's Nuclear Safety Programme. 