That plastic bottle or plastic take-away coffee lid that has  20 minutes of use can spend decades killing countless  seabirds, marine animals and fish, experts reported here this  week. On remote Pacific island atolls, diligent albatross parents  unknowingly fill their chicks' bellies with bits of plastic  that resemble food.  The chicks die of malnutrition, and when  their bodies decay all those plastic bottle tops, disposable  lighters, and the ubiquitous bits of plastic detritus get  back into the environment in a cruel perversion of  'recycling'. There is now so much plastic in the oceans it is likely that  virtually every seabird has plastic in its belly if its  feeding habits mean it mistakes plastic bits for food.  The  same is true for sea turtles, marine animals or fish,  experts say. Northern fulmars, a common seabird numbering in the  millions, have a collective 45 tonnes worth of plastic bits  in their bellies, estimates Jan Andries van Franeker, a  biologist with the Institute for Marine Resources and  Ecosystem Studies at the University of Wageningen in  Holland. At least 95 percent of fulmars in the North Sea where van  Franeker has been working for three decades have one to  several dozen bits of plastic in their stomachs.  The same is  true for related species like the tiny Wilson's storm  petrels, which unknowingly transport an estimated 35 tonnes  of plastic from their wintering grounds in the North  Atlantic to breeding grounds in the Antarctic, he says. 'If a seabird's feeding habits mean it could mistake plastic  for food, then it will likely have plastic in its stomach,'  he said in an interview at the weeklong Fifth International  Marine Debris Conference, which ends Friday in Honolulu,  Hawaii. It has been 10 years since the last international marine  debris conference and the hope is that industry, civil  society, researchers and policy makers will find common  ground on the strategies and best practices to assess,  reduce, and prevent the impacts of marine debris. 'I sometimes have this kind of dream or nightmare where  those fulmars drop all of that plastic on an audience in big  conference room like this,' van Franeker told IPS.  'It would  make a very clear statement. 'It is a statement that needs to be made with the escalating  problem of the world's oceans being filled a staggering  amount of plastic, fishing gear, and all other kinds of  debris.  There is no accurate accounting of exactly how much  but it appears to be in the tens of millions of tonnes each  year and is mostly from land-based sources. A 2006 United Nations Environment Programme estimate  suggested every square kilometere of world's ocean has an  average of 13,000 pieces of plastic litter floating on the  surface.  A walk on an ocean shoreline anywhere in the world  will provide ample evidence of the scale of the problem -  unless it was recently cleaned up. The Ocean Conservancy, a U. S. -based NGO, has been leading  beach and shoreline cleanups around the world for 25 years.   Over that time, nearly nine million volunteers in 152  countries have cleaned up and catalogued 66 million  kilogrammes of trash, according a new report released here  in Honolulu. The top three trash items collected by number of items found  were cigarette butts, food packaging and bottle caps or  lids.  Plastic bags, bottles and straws or stirrers also made  the top 10. 'People don't realise that the cumulative impact of marine  debris is a major issue for the oceans,' said Achim Steiner,  executive director of the United Nations Environment  Programme (UNEP). UNEP and the National Oceanic Atmospheric Administration  (NOAA) are conference co-sponsors.  (Full disclosure: UNEP  provided travel funding for IPS to attend the conference). Steiner said marine debris is an 'out of sight, out of mind'  type of problem but noted there was new science showing that  tiny plastic particles called microplastics may be leaching  endocrine disruptor chemicals.  affecting the health of  marine species and possibly humans. 'We need to become less reliant on plastics,' he told  conference participants in a video statement. About 260 million tonnes of new plastic is made each year.   Plastic does not really biodegrade, it only breaks down into  smaller pieces until it is microscopic - microplastic  particles - that can remain in the environment for hundreds  of years. In 1950, just five million tonnes of plastic was  manufactured globally.  Today each person in developed  countries uses about 100 kgs of plastic annually while less  developed use 20 kgs and that number is growing rapidly. Steiner said policies like South Korea's mandatory Extended  Producer Responsibility System (EPR) are not only part of  the solution but a new source of jobs and income.  The EPR  system requires manufacturers and importers to recycle a  certain amount of their products.  In the five years since  the programme's launch in Korea, six million tonnes of waste  has been recycled, including 70,000 tonnes of plastic,  producing a financial benefit of over 1. 6 billion dollars. Keeping plastic trash out of the ocean is as simple as  setting up a mandatory deposit system with a high enough  value on anything plastic to ensure it is too valuable to  throw away, says van Franeker.  Germany, the Netherlands and  the Nordic countries all have deposit systems for plastic  bottles and recycling rates are better than 95 percent as a  result. 'Degradable or compostable plastic should be banned.  The  bio-plastics have as much plastic as those made from oil,'  he said. The so-called degradable bio-plastics simply break down into  microplastic particles faster than traditional plastics.  'We  might not be able to see them with our eyes but the plastic  is still there,' he added. The industry pushes degradable and compostable plastics so  that one-time short term use of plastic can continue, he  said.  'One time use of plastic is simply unsustainable. 'Van Franeker is not anti-plastic.  'It is a wonderful  material.  Real plastic is valuable.  It can be made to be  safe and reuseable. '