A college student who derailed a federal auction of oil and  gas leases to protest drilling near national parks in the  western U. S.  state of Utah, as well as the larger issue of  reliance on fossil fuels, has reignited debate over the  legitimacy of civil disobedience in addressing profound global  problems like climate change. In December 2008, the twilight of the George W.  Bush  administration, Tim DeChristopher attended the auction, held  by the Bureau of Land Management, and bid 1. 8 million  dollars on parcels he never intended to actually buy.  BLM  agents caught on to the ruse fairly quickly, and  DeChristopher was detained and then charged with making a  false statement to the government and violating the Federal  Onshore Oil and Gas Leasing Reform Act. The young activist, then an economics student at the  University of Utah, organised a fundraising drive and 'in  less than a week, he had more than enough money to pay for  the auction,' his lawyer Patrick Shea told IPS.  But 'it was  rejected [by] the Bush-Cheney administration [since] they  did not want to make accommodation to the environmental  actors. 'The Barack Obama administration later invalidated the  auction, shelving 77 contested lease parcels - including  ones DeChristopher had bid on.  However, it continued with  criminal charges against the 28-year-old. After a week-long trial earlier this month, he was convicted  of two felonies and now faces up to 10 years in prison.  Critics note that the jurors did not hear all the facts,  particularly that DeChristopher's actions were driven by  moral imperatives and deep concern about the impacts of  climate change. Judge Dee Benson of U. S.  District Court in Salt Lake City  ruled that jurors would not be told about the subsequent  invalidation of the auction or the refusal to accept late  payment because that would touch on DeChristopher's  political motives. 'In my judgement, what happened was the oil industry put  enormous pressure on the U. S.  attorney's office and other  organisations to prosecute him,' Shea told IPS, adding 'even  though, for instance, no one on Wall Street has gone to jail  for the financial meltdown, which has harmed many more  people than anybody than might have been harmed by Tim's  act. 'According to Shea, his ultimate sentence is likely to be  less than 10 years.  'The prosecutor has indicated that he  would seek 41 months, which is a long time for an action  that harmed no one and corrected the system in a way that  America has always had this system corrected - by civil  disobedience,' he said. In an article published in 1999, noted U. S.  historian Howard  Zinn discusses the 'long and honourable tradition in the  U. S.  of citizen actions of civil disobedience - that is, of  technical violations of law to serve important social  values. 'Three of the country's biggest environmental groups -  Greenpeace, the Rainforest Action Network and 350. org — also  condemned the judgement in a Mar.  7 open letter. 'There have been a growing number of inspiring examples of  civil disobedience across the United States to protect the  air we breathe, the water we drink and the climate that we  depend on,' the letter reads. Blogging on Mar.  4, Phil Radford, executive director of  Greenpeace USA, declared that 'just as racists should have  been on trial in the Civil Rights Movement and the British  during the Boston Tea Party, it is the oil and coal  industries and their friends in Congress who pursue power  and profit over the health of our children who should be in  jail, not Tim. ''The guilty sentence that Tim is facing is a radical,  disproportionate overreach to his action,' Radford said.   'DeChristopher stood up to protect our future from carbon  pollution and the reckless hands of Big Oil. ' Likewise, 350. org founder Bill McKibben affirmed in a  statement on Mar.  3 that, 'Tim has shown the power of civil  disobedience to shine a light - the government should be  giving him a medal, not a sentence, and in time this will be  recalled as a key early battle in the century's long fight  for a liveable climate. 'In their Mar.  7 letter, the heads of the three environmental  groups also declare that 'just in case the federal  government thinks that it's intimidating people into silence  with this kind of prosecution, think again. ' According to  them, it is more likely to energise the movement, since 'in  fact, this is precisely the sort of event that reminds us  just why we need creative, nonviolent protests and mass  mobilizations. 'Scott Parkin, a campaigner with the Rainforest Action  Network, told IPS that 'non-violent civil disobedience is  one of the best strategies we have. ' Indeed, 'people have  long been doing legal acts [of protest] and haven't really  moved anything,' he said, adding, 'We [now] need to  escalate. 'Parkin pointed out that DeChristopher's case has garnered  wide support, with protests in Salt Lake City drawing people  from different communities, many with no history of  political or environmental activism.  His sentence will be handed down in June.  Shea is now trying  to get DeChristopher community service instead of jail time.  Following his conviction, DeChristopher told Grist, 'Climate  change is a war against people and especially young people.   People's lives are being traded for the profit of others.   That's a war.  And yet it doesn't look that way, it doesn't  feel that way to most people.  It just looks like businessmen  making a profit.  It looks like congressmen not doing their  jobs very well. ''So when we make ourselves vulnerable and invite that  reaction against ourselves, whether it's a physical reaction  or a reaction of the legal system, it starts to reframe that  perspective for people. '