Every day, billions of plastic bags and bottles are discarded,  and every day, millions of these become plastic pollution,  fouling the oceans and endangering marine life. No one wants this, but there is wide disagreement about how  to stop it. 'Every time I stick my nose in the water, I am shocked.  I  see less and less fish and more and more garbage,' said  Jean-Michel Cousteau, son of the legendary marine ecologist  Jacques Cousteau, who has spent four decades making  documentaries and educating people about the oceans. On trips to the remote and uninhabited northwestern Hawaiian  Islands, Cousteau found miles and miles of plastic bottles,  cigarette lighters, television tubes, spray cans, broken  toys, and thousands of other pieces of plastic on the  beaches and thousands of tonnes of derelict fishing nets in  the reefs. 'We are using the oceans as a universal sewer,' he told some  440 participants from the plastics manufacturing, food and  beverage sectors, environmental organisations, scientists  and policy-makers from over 35 countries at Fifth  International Marine Debris Conference in Honolulu, Hawaii,  which ended Mar.  25. Humanity is risking its own health and survival in treating  the oceans this way, Cousteau said.  The oceans are the  source of life on our planet.  Through evaporation, oceans  are the most important source of fresh water while  phytoplankton generates at least half the oxygen we breathe. 'No one is away from the ocean.  We are all intimately  connected by every breath we take,' he said. Sadly, the same is true for trash.  The UNEP-Global Programme  of Action (GPA) estimates that about 80 percent of the  plastics and other human-produced debris originate from  land-based activities.  In some parts of the ocean, there are  three to six kilogrammes of marine trash for every  kilogramme of plankton. Cousteau implored participants to collaborate and come up  with a set of actions to reduce the amount of plastics and  marine debris that are getting into the oceans. California nearly became the first U. S.  state to ban plastic  bags, but a multi-million-dollar lobby effort by industry  killed the proposed legislation as it came to a final vote,  said Kirsten James, water quality director of Heal the Bay,  a California environmental group. 'Less than five percent of the 19 billion plastic bags used  in California every year are recycled,' said James. Despite the broad coalition involving grocery store owners,  unions, local legislators and the public, the American  Chemistry Council, an industry lobby group, fought the ban  with its own 'save the plastic bag coalition'.  It is now  spending more millions on lawsuits to prevent towns and  cities from instituting local plastic bag bans, she said. However, some cities such as Los Angles are instituting  local bans, with about 10 percent of California to be bag- free by 2012. Industry is always pushing public education and recycling,  but that is clearly not enough, James said.  She also  acknowledged that banning plastic bags is the first step in  trying to eliminate single-use plastic products.  'We're  going to have to fight this fight for years to come. 'Part of the city of San Francisco's effort to combat marine  debris is to produce zero waste by 2020.  The city already  diverts 77 percent of its waste but still spends 40 million  dollars a year cleaning up litter, said Robert Haley of San  Francisco's department of environment.  The city has banned  several types of plastic, including styrofoam. 'We're working on a plastic bag ban but facing resistance  from industry,' Haley said. 'Why doesn't industry simply eliminate single-use plastic  containers for food and beverages?' David de Rothschild, a  British adventurer and environmentalist, asked the  representative from the American Chemistry Council at a  special panel discussion only for media. The public should reduce their use of single-use containers  and properly recycle them, responded Steve Russell, the  Council's vice president of plastics. 'Why does your industry spend millions on promoting plastic  bags?' de Rothschild asked. 'It's a material choice that the consumer makes, it is not  about single-use,' Russell replied. When IPS asked Russell, since seabirds, turtles, fish and  other marine animals are dying because of single-use  plastic, why not take the obvious step of replacing it with  another product, Russell gave a similar answer. 'We incorporate environmental impacts into our life cycle  analysis of our containers,' said April Crow, global  sustainable packaging manager for Coca-Cola, another  panellist.  When asked by IPS if that analysis included the ecological  impact of seabirds with bellyfuls of plastic, she declined  to elaborate. 'There is no single solution,' suggested conference  organiser David Osborn of the United Nations Environment  Programme (UNEP). 'Marine debris is a wicked problem, one that is difficult to  define, multi-causal, socially complex with no clear  solution,' Osborn said to conclude the panel. 'It's a no-brainer.  We have to stop putting plastic in the  sea,' said Richard Thompson, a marine biologist at the  University of Plymouth, in one of the scientific sessions. 'There is no reason for delay.  Governments and industry need  to take action and people have to stop pointing fingers at  each other and get on with it,' said Thompson. Jean-Michel Cousteau expressed a similar sentiment at the  end of his opening remarks and noted that keeping trash out  of the oceans would create many thousands of new jobs. 'Now that we know, we simply have to change,' he concluded. 