The newly elected chair of the Overseas Countries and  Territories Association (OCTA), Montserrat's Chief Minister  Reuben Meade, wants 'trade rather than aid' to form the basis  of the future relationship between Europe and its colonies  around the world. The ninth European Development Fund (EDF) assistance  programmes are now coming to an end, and Meade wants to 'get  maximum benefits' for the 17 member countries of OCTA -  mainly territories of Britain, France, the Netherlands and  Denmark - when EDF-10 comes on stream. 'The European Union rules on drawing down on funds are  extremely stringent and it can take years to get a  drawdown,' Meade told IPS.  'What we are trying to do is to  ensure that both sides pretty much understands what needs to  be done to draw down the money' that plays a significant  role in the socio-economic development of these European  colonies. 'We continue to face many difficulties in the finalisation  of the frameworks for the funds to be released,' said Meade,  whose island, under the EDF-10, has been allocated 15. 7  million Euros for building a new port. Each year a ministerial meeting between the ministers of the  OCTs and a Tripartite Forum between the member states, the  European Commission and the OCTs are held.  The ministerial  meeting sets out the visions, strategy and action plan which  is subsequently implemented by the Executive Council, while  the Forum outlines the visions for cooperation between the  parties. This year's meeting in early March took place in New  Caledonia, a French colony located in the southwest Pacific.   The distance proved to be a nightmare for some delegates and  Meade, who had expressed his disappointment at the absence  of several key European Union representatives, told IPS that  a proposal is now being considered that would allow for the  annual meetings to be held in Brussels with the OCTs staging  'focused' meetings on matters such as the environment. 'This would give the opportunity for all players in the  partnership who are involved in facilitating the support to  OCTs to be present and can share critical information.  Given  the scarcity of resources, we have to be mindful of the  cost-effectiveness of hosting these fora outside of  Brussels,' he added. Meade said another aspect of his stewardship will be to get  'Europe to better understand the needs of the territories'.   He believes the Apr.  12 'Open Day in Brussels' showcasing  the socio-economic development strategies of the overseas  territories will provide the European parliamentarians and  other stakeholders with the opportunity to get 'a better  feel of what are our challenges'. But Meade, 57, an economist by training, said that he does  not like the idea of the Europeans 'changing the rules from  time to time, (and) shifting the goalpost' with little or no  consultation. OCTA was established as a non-profit organisation in 2002  and has since been working to coordinate the views of the  overseas territories, whose leaders have already established  a Joint Position paper (JPP) that sets out the framework  terms and conditions the European Union will use to prepare  the new Overseas Association Decision (OAD). Market access looms largeThe existing OAD, which is a trade regime that gives the  OCTs free market access to the EU to help create economic  and social prosperity in the territories, expires in 2013. Britain has already indicated that the successor to the OAD  must be flexible enough to meet the needs of both the  larger, more prosperous territories, and those which are  more vulnerable and likely to be in need of development  assistance for years to come. 'The mandate of the European Union is to look at poverty  reduction and there are some Overseas Territories which do  not get direct aid from them,' said Angela Greenway, who is  also Montserrat's Territorial Authorisation Officer for the  EDF.  'There have been challenges with drawing down the funds from  approved EU projects and the new agreement will look at the  disbursement,' she said. Other areas which are covered in the proposed position paper  are the issues of environmental protection and trade. An array of challengesWhen he took over the chairmanship of OCTA, Meade said he  regarded his election 'not only as a serious responsibility  but as an opportunity to support the diverse agenda of the  OCTs. ''It is no doubt a challenging time to be the chairman of  OCTA,' he added.  'We must face the effects of protracted  global economic and financial decline, falling levels of  disposable incomes of our people and increasing challenges  of war and natural disasters and their demand on scarce  resources. 'The Montserrat government leader said that the targets set  by the EU to be achieved by the year 2020 provide 'the basis  for hope in the OCTs, if we can fully benefit from such an  agenda. 'According to Meade these targets include an employment rate  of 75 percent of the 20- to 64-year-old-olds in the overseas  territories; investment of three percent of the EU's gross  domestic product in research, development and innovation;  and reducing greenhouse gases by 20 percent below the 1990  levels, conditioned on international agreement. The targets also call for achieving 20 percent energy from  renewable sources and a 20-percent increase in energy  efficiency, reducing school drop-out rates to below 10  percent, and having at least 40 percent of 30- to 34-year- olds complete tertiary education or its equivalent. Committing to 20 million fewer people at risk of poverty and  social exclusion is also among the identified targets. But Meade, a strong supporter of a redefined relationship  with the EU, says he hopes at the end of his one-year  chairmanship, his legacy would be that the OCTs have been  able to gain improved trading opportunities with Europe. 'Basically that's what we are looking at. . . focusing on trade  relationships rather than aid,' he said, noting that the  OCTs could benefit from their services sector as well as  investment opportunities in the European colonies. In the Caribbean, the OCTs are Anguilla, Aruba, British  Virgin Islands, Cayman Islands, Montserrat, Netherlands  Antilles, Turks and Caicos Islands.  In the Indian Ocean,  there is Mayotte, and in the Pacific there are New  Caledonia, Pitcairn, French Polynesia, Wallis and Futuna.   The Falkland Islands, Greenland, Saint Pierre and Miquelon  and Saint Helena are also members. 