As environmental experts, NGOs and government officials gather in Istanbul this  week to attend the Fifth World Water Forum, the International Committee of the  Red Cross (ICRC) has drawn attention to the critical water situation in Gaza. 'ICRC teams are repairing water and sewage systems in Gaza that were badly  damaged during the three-week Israeli military operation in January,' the  ICRC says in a media release.    'According to the Ministry of Health in Gaza, one-fifth of the population had  no direct access to drinking water, and relied on water purchased from  private suppliers.  Today, thousands of people still have no access to running  water. 'Much of Gaza's infrastructure was destroyed during Israel's military assault on  the coastal territory during Operation Cast Lead, which created a critical  humanitarian situation on the ground. The UN Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) says  150,000 Gazans still remain affected by inadequate and unsafe water supply.   Of these, about 50,000 remain without any water while the remainder receive  water only every five to six days. The OCHA adds that approximately 28,000 children in the Gaza Strip have no  access to piped water.  An additional 56,000 children have access to water  only every week or so.   Gaza's Coast Municipalities Water Utility (CMWU), which handles water and  sewage treatment, says the water crisis will continue until Israel allows  sufficient spare parts and repair materials into Gaza.  Israel's continuing blockade of the strip means that construction material,  most spare parts and repair materials have been prevented from entering.   This has made it impossible to rebuild the thousands of destroyed and  damaged buildings.  It has also severely restricted repair of vital infrastructure  such as waste and water treatment plants.  Continual electricity blackouts have further limited the treatment plants'  operating capacity, while severe restrictions on the import of fuel have limited  the ability of emergency generators. While the war exacerbated the situation, Gaza's infrastructure was already  dilapidated and in urgent need of repair due to the previous 18 months of  closure which followed Hamas taking power in June 2007. The CMWU has been forced to pump tonnes of untreated sewage directly into  the sea, which then seeps back into Gaza's underground water supply, further  threatening safe drinking water supplies. Recent water tests indicate that piped water in Gaza is not safe for human  consumption.  Forty-five of 248 water samples tested were found to be  contaminated, primarily in the North Gaza and Gaza city districts. Israel shelled Gaza's biggest wastewater treatment plant in Sheikh Ajleen,  south-east of Gaza city, which usually treats raw sewage from approximately  400,000 people.  The torrent of raw, untreated sewage flowing into residential  areas, agricultural land and the sea was visible from outer space, according to  satellite images released by the UN. The UN's Operational Satellite Applications Programme (UNOSAT) showed the  impact of the crater from the Israeli bomb and a sewage flow that travelled a  distance of 1. 2 km. The ICRC and CMWU have been coordinating efforts to repair the plant but  have been hampered by delays in obtaining the necessary approval from the  Israeli authorities to bring in pipes and spare parts. 'The first thing people ask us for is water and electricity,' says Marek  Komarzynski, an ICRC water engineer.  'That is what they need to lead  anything like normal lives. 'But the humanitarian crisis in the wake of the war and the blockade affects  nearly every other aspect of the daily lives of ordinary Gazans. At the end of February the UN Relief and Works Agency (UNRWA) assessed  that over 2,000 families needed their homes to be rebuilt, while nearly  11,000 families required urgent repairs to their homes.  The agency said it  expected the figures to rise. Six Palestinian Authority (PA) schools in northern Gaza were also severely  damaged, forcing nearly 5,000 school children to relocate to other schools.   The overcrowding meant that additional double-shifts were introduced,  further burdening the 351 schools, approximately half of which already run  double-shifts. Meanwhile, Gaza's hospitals are struggling because equipment such as  neonatal machines lack spare parts, while some medicines are not available.   Furthermore, only half of more than 300 Gazans who wanted to travel abroad  for emergency medical treatment succeeded in getting permits from Israel.   Malnutrition is another growing problem, and children and pregnant women  bear the brunt.  UNICEF recently provided vitamin supplements to 50,000  babies and children under five. The OCHA says that the 127 truckloads of daily aid permitted in by the Israeli  authorities is insufficient to meet market needs.  Prior to the blockade 475  trucks entered daily. Poverty and unemployment plague Gaza following Israel's destruction of  various sectors which provided employment.  The Private Sector Coordination Council (PSCC) assesses that 700 private  sector establishments were either completely destroyed or damaged.  The  damage is valued at 140 million dollars. The UN Development Programme (UNDP), the Food and Agriculture  Organisation (FAO) and the Palestinian Ministry of Agriculture estimate that  180 million dollars worth of damage was done to agricultural infrastructure. The fishing sector was estimated to have suffered direct and indirect losses of  2. 2 million dollars, due to destruction of fishing boats and related materials.  And even those who are employed and earning are struggling.  According to  the International Monetary Fund (IMF), Israeli restrictions on the entry of cash  into Gaza has affected the livelihoods of up to half a million Gazans, in a  population of 1. 5 million.  