Many countries view nuclear energy as a way to meet growing electricity  demands without releasing large amounts of greenhouse gasses.  And as a major  uranium exporter, Australia is keen to capitalise on future opportunities despite  the ongoing nuclear emergency at Japan’s Fukushima reactors. Along with Kazakhstan and Canada, Australia is one of the world’s largest  suppliers of uranium, which fuels electricity-generation at nuclear power  stations. The International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), the world’s nuclear watchdog,  says that there are 442 nuclear reactors in operation in 30 countries,  including Taiwan.  A further 65 are currently under construction across 16  nations, with 27 being built in China alone. Prior to the Japanese radiation emergency, the IAEA anticipated that up to 25  countries that do not have a nuclear power station at present would have  access to the technology by 2030. 'There are probably 11 or 12 countries that are actively developing the  infrastructure for a nuclear power programme,' said the IAEA’s Anne Starz in  February. 'The region where we see the largest number of active countries is in  Southeast Asia,' added Starz.  'There is also interest in Africa, the Middle East,  Europe and Latin America. 'The cause of this growing interest in nuclear power is two-fold.  The current  level of global energy demand is expected to double over the next two  decades, with nuclear energy seen as one way of meeting the world’s needs.   Also, nuclear power plants emit negligible levels of greenhouse gases into the  atmosphere - unlike coal-fired power stations.  Nuclear energy’s lack of  emissions is regarded as a means to combat global warming and avoid  dangerous climate change. Some 9,000 to 10,000 tonnes of uranium oxide concentrate - the form in  which the partly processed uranium is exported - is shipped from here in an  average year, according to the local industry’s representative body, the  Australian Uranium Association (AUA). This equates to about one-fifth of global demand.  All of the uranium mined in  Australia is sent overseas for use in civil power stations in countries that have  signed up to the nuclear non-proliferation treaty (NPT) as well as to a bilateral  safeguards agreement with Australia. Roughly 15 to 17 percent of annual Australian uranium exports go to Japan -  one-fifth of that country’s requirements.  Among other destinations for  Australian uranium are the U. S. , United Kingdom, France, Finland, South Korea  and Taiwan. According to figures from the trade department, these exports generated  some 679 million Australian dollars in revenue in 2009 - just 0. 7 percent of  the total earned by Australia’s booming minerals and fuels export sector. But uranium’s small contribution - relative to coal and iron ore - of export  earnings could grow if global interest in nuclear power continues along the  prevalent trend prior to the Japan crisis. The IAEA expects that 70 percent of the growth in global energy requirements  by 2030 will come from developing nations - with China and India at the  forefront. Australia signed a safeguards agreement with China in 2006 and began  sending uranium there in 2009.  An AUA spokesperson told IPS that export  levels to China are 'very much' expected to grow. There remains debate here over whether to supply India, a non-signatory to  the NPT, with uranium for its nuclear power stations.  A deal to do so was  struck by the conservative government of John Howard in 2007 but was  reversed when the Australian Labour Party, which remains in office, came to  power later that year. Despite the crisis in Japan, Australia remains keen to capitalise on its  resource, although considerable opposition exists from environmentalists and  others concerned about the dangers of nuclear energy. Besides the revenue generated, the AUA argues that billions of tonnes of  greenhouse gas emissions could be avoided if the industry was allowed to  expand to its full potential. Around 40 percent of the globe’s recoverable uranium is in Australia, with the  single biggest deposit in the world contained at the Olympic Dam site in  South Australia state.  BHP Billiton, which fully owns Olympic Dam and which  sent a 1 million dollar donation to the Red Cross to assist with disaster relief  in Japan, is currently exploring expansion opportunities at the mine. But exploration and mining of uranium is currently only permitted in three of  Australia’s eight states and territories.  The Uranium Industry Framework, a  joint industry-government partnership, was established in 2005 to help  develop the industry and take advantage of increasing global demand. Prime Minister Julia Gillard has made clear that her government’s position  regarding the export of uranium has not been altered by radiation escaping  from Japan’s stricken power station. 'What is happening in Japan doesn’t have any impact on my thinking about  uranium exports from this country,' said Gillard, 'We do export uranium and  we will continue to export uranium. 'Uranium industry officials have also expressed similar sentiments.  Speaking at  a uranium conference held in the southern city of Adelaide last week, Michael  Angwin, chief executive officer of the AUA, said that the factors which  motivate countries to use nuclear power remain unaffected by events in Japan.   'Countries turn to nuclear energy because they wish to improve their energy  security and expand their electricity generating capacity in a way that does  not increase their carbon emissions.  That remains the case today. '