Kindness Paradza has a mission.  After he lost his job as a journalist when the  ZANU-PF government closed his newspaper in 2004, he ploughed his life  savings into a 2,000 ha farm he received as part of Zimbabwe’s controversial  'land reform programme'. Since then he has been patiently rotating land use between crops such as  tobacco, wheat and maize.  He now hopes to build a business enterprise with  profits from his farm. The launch of the new commodity exchange could have come as a boon for  him, as he now has more room to negotiate better prices.  Previously this  space for negotiation did not exist as the state-owned Grain Marketing Board  (GMB) was the sole buyer of grain. However, Paradza, like many new farmers, is not celebrating the arrival of the  Commodity Exchange of Zimbabwe (COMEZ).  Although it has been promoted as a mechanism to minimise exploitation of  farmers by agricultural buyers and usher in orderly trading of commodities,  while creating opportunities for farmers to get better prices, Paradza remains  sceptical. 'We don’t know it and, surely, how does something that you don’t know help  you?' Paradza asks rhetorically. COMEZ is a commodities market; commodities markets across the world trade  in agricultural products such as wheat, barley, sugar, maize and cotton, with  contracts based on them.  These contracts can include futures.  A simplified example would be: a maize  farmer can sell a futures contract on her maize, which will not be harvested  for several months, and guarantee the price to be paid at the time of delivery.  The futures contract is bought with a guarantee that the price will not go up  when it is delivered.  This protects the farmer from price drops and the buyer  from price rises.  COMEZ will initially trade grains, cereals and oil seeds. According to the ministry of industry and commerce, COMEZ is meant to  'provide fair and open prices' for agricultural produce as reflected on the  market. The minister of industry and commerce, Welshman Ncube, told IPS at the  launch of COMEZ two months ago that it would serve as a mechanism to  break the state monopoly in the grain trade. 'We should create a transparent, open and accessible commodities market  where both buyers and sellers can participate, knowing the prevailing prices,'  Ncube said. In the last 10 years, the Agricultural Marketing Authority (AMA) determined  the prices of agricultural produce, while GMB was designated as the sole  buyer of grain.  AMA is the regulator of grain pricing in Zimbabwe. Tafadzwa Musarara, president of the Zimbabwe Grain Millers’ Association,  welcomes COMEZ but says it should be organised in line with international  standards for it to work properly. 'It is welcome in the sense that the contracts that farmers will enter into with  grain traders and other buyers will give them bankable papers which they can  use to capitalise their operations, rather than working on a cash basis as is  the case right now,' Musarara told IPS. 'Nevertheless, it is important that we come up with structures that are in line  with international practice in order to attract foreign buyers. 'Most farmers still do not understand what exactly COMEZ does and why it was  established.  They would prefer to see how it practically works before  committing any of their produce. Paradza complains that, 'we know that it is not going to work in our favour  because of the commissions that we will be asked to pay at the warehouse,  auctions and traders -- just like they do at the Zimbabwe Stock Exchange.   The traders will sell on our behalf and it is those traders who will make  money'. Alice Machingauta, a Chihota farmer, told IPS while delivering her tobacco  crop that, 'I haven’t heard about it but if there are merchants involved then I  don’t want it because the merchants are only there to reap what they did not  sow'.  Grain trader and economist Tinashe Mawarire told IPS that COMEZ suffers  from the fear of the unknown.  'Farmers are used to delivering their produce to GMB and waiting for the  announcement of the price.  The advantage with COMEZ is its willing-buyer- willing-seller arrangement, unlike in the past when everyone was compelled  to sell to GMB only,' Mawarire points out. 'If you are not happy with the price, you don’t sell.  It’s as easy as that. 'Analyst Brains Muchemwa cautions that, 'farmers need to be educated on  how COMEZ works and how they can get better prices'.  