As authorities struggle to control dangerous radioactive material spilling from  the quake ravaged Fukushima nuclear power reactors, a more difficult question  has begun to unsettle Japan - is the country’s post-war prosperity as invincible  as was believed till now?'The picture emerging today is a sobering one and consumes us,' says  Yoshiaki Kawata, a researcher in disaster management at Kansai University.   'The devastation is a harsh reminder of the vulnerability of our economic and  technological might we had worked so hard to create. 'The Mar.  11 earthquake and tsunami that turned vast stretches of once  thriving Tohoku into muddy wastelands and spewed radioactive material  contaminating residential and farming areas, is now being considered a lesson  that technological advancement can not always protect countries against  natural disasters. 'For example, Japan has poured in millions of dollars to create high speed  trains that can shuttle people over hundreds of kilometres with speeds that  race time.  But this brilliant technology that touts convenience and economic  gain cannot guarantee fool proof safety,' says Kawata. The aftermath of the Tohoku quake and unfolding nuclear power disaster has  kindled memories here of the post-war period when the country lay in  smoking ruins with two of its cities flattened after the U. S.  dropped the  world’s first and only atomic bombs in 1945. That tragedy was overcome in what is known as the Japanese 'economic  miracle'.  In less than fewer forty years, the country sprang back to become  the world’s second richest until China took over only last year.  Japan won  respect and pride for the rise of its glistening cities, educated and affluent  population, and rapid technological innovation. But such brilliant recovery is not what the Japanese are talking about today.   The post-war economic model is showing cracks, according to analysts and  public blogs. One of the most outspoken critics of the now tottering ‘Japan Inc. ’ is  Shigenobu Hattori, a former nuclear design scientist who worked for the  government to shape the country’s first nuclear power policies in the 1970s. The retired expert says he was frustrated and angry when large power  companies - supported by huge amounts of state funding - rejected his  research on a smaller and safer nuclear reactor, which he believed, was more  suitable for earthquake-prone Japan.  'The big companies told me they could  not fund my research because the plan did not fit their grand scheme which  was to build big expensive nuclear power plants to generate large amounts of  electricity,' he said.  'Company profit and national pride took priority over  human safety in the country’s economic advancement. 'Today Hattori says his phone has not stopped ringing.  'Companies now want  to meet with me again.  It is a sign of long awaited change.  A humbler and  slower pace is what must guide our next crucial opportunity to rebuild,' he  said. Haruko Watanabe, a journalist and social commentator, says the disaster has  weakened a once unshakable respect for the experts whose promises of  economic growth are no longer credible. 'Decades of post-war confidence created a hardworking and docile middle- class that slaved away in top companies believing elite universities and white  collar jobs were the way to go,' she said.  'But the picture emerging today is  different. 'This week the Japanese media is focusing on men and women of courage and  patient sacrifice in Tohoku.  They took care of the sick in hospitals where  infrastructure was beyond repair, shared food and shelter to survive, and have  even begun conducting the annual school graduation ceremonies in tents or  broken classrooms. News reports are also focusing on the poignant sacrifice of 400 nuclear power  employees of Tokyo Electric Company (TEPCO) and its subsidiaries.  These  workers are toiling day and night despite radiation levels well over the normal  level inside the damaged buildings. Kyodo News Service, quoting the Nuclear and Industrial Safety Agency,  describes some of the details of the workers’ lives inside the plant - a 1. 5  litre bottle of mineral water and two meals of dried rice and canned chicken  per day. Kawata describes such stories as examples of the enduring strength of  Japanese traditional culture.  'The belief the state knows best attitude is what  fortifies people to remain patient during a crisis.  Still, what is now inspiring  the nation is the fighting spirit of tens of thousands of survivors,' he said. 