Last year, tens of thousands of tonnes of tools, seeds and  plant cuttings were distributed to almost 400,000 Haitian  farming families, perhaps one-third to one-half of the  country's farming population. The 20-million-dollar programme — spearheaded by the U. N.   Food and Agriculture Organisation (FAO), and carried out by  the FAO and large international non-governmental  organisations or 'INGOs' like Oxfam, USAID, Catholic Relief  Services, as well as the Ministry of Agriculture — was  kicked into action in the weeks following the Jan.  12, 2010  earthquake.  Warning of a looming 'food crisis', the FAO and large INGOs  urged funders to help them buy seed and tools to help the  families hosting the over 500,000 refugees who had streamed  out of the capital and other destroyed cities. 'The logic behind [the distribution] is that in the zones  directly affected by the earthquake and in the zones that  received a great number of displaced people, the peasants  were decapitalised,' according to the FAO's Francesco Del  Re.  'It wasn't a general distribution.  It was a well- targeted distribution, for the most vulnerable. 'Agribusiness behemoth Monsanto also offered 475 tonnes of  hybrid maize and vegetable seeds to be distributed mostly by  USAID's flagship agriculture programme, WINNER (Watershed  Initiative for National Environmental Resources).  (Despite repeated requests to WINNER, Haiti Grassroots Watch  was denied an interview.  It is unclear whether the entire  475 tonnes made it into Haiti, nor is it clear which  communities received the seeds). Most actors agree that in the immediate aftermath of the  earthquake, the emergency distributions had some beneficial  aspects, but Haiti Grassroots Watch decided to take a closer  look.  During its three-month investigation, the Haiti Grassroots  Watch partnership of community radio journalists and  reporters from the Society for the Animation of Social  Communications (SAKS) and the online news agency AlterPresse  discovered environmental and health risks, failed harvests,  the threat of dependency and other controversial aspects. The findings were released in a nine-part series on Mar.  30.   They are available in full at  http://www. haitigrassrootswatch. org. Independent study faults distribution strategyContrary to the cries of alarm over 'farmers eating their  seed', a multi-agency seed security study shepherded by  researcher Louise Sperling of the International Center for  Tropical Agriculture (CIAT) determined that '[u]nlike nearly  everywhere else in the world, 'eating and selling one's  seed' are not distress signals in Haiti: They are normal  practices. 'The study said there was 'no seed emergency' in Haiti and  recommended, in June 2010, against distributions, saying  that instead host families should have been given cash to  buy local seed and take care of other urgent needs.  Even though the seed study also warned that 'one should  never introduce varieties in an emergency context which have  not been tested in the given agro-ecological site and under  farmers' management conditions' - and in direct  contradiction with Haitian law and international conventions  which aim to protect the gene pool and the ecosystem in  general - the Ministry of Agriculture approved Monsanto's  donation of 475 tonnes of hybrid seed varieties.  Although USAID/WINNER attempted to conceal its work behind  contractual gag rules imposed on all staff, Haiti Grassroots  Watch found out that at least 60 tonnes of Monsanto, Pioneer  and other hybrid maize and vegetable seed varieties were  distributed and were actively promoted. In an internal report leaked to the investigating team,  USAID/WINNER staff wrote: 'Despite a whole media campaign  against hybrids under the cover of GMO/Agent Orange/Round  Up, the seeds were used almost everywhere, the true message  got through, although not at the level hoped for,' and '[W]e  are in the process of working as quickly as possible with  farmers to increase as much as possible the use of hybrid  seeds. 'Hooked on hybrids?At least some of the peasant farmer groups receiving  Monsanto and other hybrid maize and other cereal seeds have  little understanding of the implications of getting 'hooked'  on hybrid seeds, since most Haitian farmers select seeds  from their own harvests. One of the USAID/WINNER trained extension agents told Haiti  Grassroots Watch that in his region, farmers won't need to  save seeds anymore: 'They don't have to kill themselves like  before.  They can plant, harvest, sell or eat.  They don't  have to save seeds anymore because they know they will get  seeds from the [WINNER-subsidised] store. ' When it was pointed out that WINNER's subsidies end when the  project ends in four years, he had no logical response. At least some of the farmer groups interviewed also don't  appear to understand the health and environmental risks  involved with the fungicide- and herbicide-coated hybrids.   In at least one location, farmers were planting seed without  the use of recommended gloves, masks and other protections,  and — until Haiti Grassroots Watch intervened — they were  planning to grind up the toxic seed to use as chicken feed. Fostering dependencyEven though most of the internally displaced people - 66  percent - had returned to cities by mid-June, seed  distributions continued throughout 2010 and into 2011. When CIAT researcher Sperling learned of this, she told  Haiti Grassroots Watch, 'Direct seed aid — when not needed ,  and given repetitively — does real harm.  It undermines local  systems, creates dependencies and stifles real commercial  sector development. ' She added that some humanitarian actors 'seem to see  delivering seed aid as easy and they welcome the overhead  (money) — even if their actions may hurt poor farmers. 'In at least several places around the country, donated seeds  produced no or little yield.  'What I would like to tell the NGOs it that, just because we  are the poorest country doesn't mean they should give us  whatever, whenever,' disgruntled Bainet farmer Jean Robert  Cadichon told Haiti Grassroots Watch. While projects attempting to improve Haiti's seed system  have been ongoing for at least the last few years, to date  the Ministry of Agriculture's National Seed Service (SNS)  consists of only two staffers. Most seed improvement projects, and the repeated seed  distributions - which started after Haiti's hurricane  disasters in 2008 - are funded principally through, and  carried out by, the FAO and INGOs rather than the Ministry  of Agriculture. SNS Director Emmanuel Prophete told Haiti Grassroots Watch  that when peasants get improved seed varieties, production  rises, but it also creates dependency. 'The system is based on a subsidy,' Prophete said.  'You have  to ask yourself about the sustainability because if the  policy changes one day, where will peasants get seeds?. . .   We'll get to a point where, one day, we have a lot of seeds,  and then suddenly, when all the NGOs are gone, we won't have  any. '*To read the multi-article series in English and French, to  watch an accompanying video or listen to the audio programme  in Haitian Creole, visit  http://www. haitigrassrootswatch. org. The Haiti Grassroots Watch (Ayiti Kale Je) is a partnership  of community radio journalists and reporters from the  Society for the Animation of Social Communications (SAKS)  and the AlterPresse online news agency. 