'Be fantastic, don't use plastic!' chanted a troop of 10-year- olds from President Thomas Jefferson Elementary School in  Honolulu at the conclusion of an international conference on  the millions of tonnes of trash that enter the oceans every  year, with serious consequences for marine life and habitats  as well as to human health and the global economy. Most participants were in a celebratory mood at the Fifth  International Marine Debris Conference, which concluded Mar.   25 with the Honolulu Commitment to address the growing  problem of marine debris. But Captain Charles Moore, the man who brought the world's  attention to the scope and scale of the problem, was not  celebrating. 'I've been doing this for 30 years and every year it has  only become worse,' Moore told IPS. Moore is famous for revealing the immense amount of plastic  in the north Pacific gyre, formed by ocean currents in a  massive slow-moving whirlpool thousands of square kilometres  in size. Moore's Algalita Marine Research Foundation documented that  this vast expanse of oceans has about six kilogrammes of  plastic for every kilogramme of plankton.  He is careful to  point out that there is no plastic island as reported in  some media, it's much more dispersed. 'I'm through with these big meetings.  It is a sad commentary  that the Honolulu Strategy is considered as a beginning to  address this,' he said. With 440 participants from 35 countries, including experts  from governments, research institutes, corporations like the  Coca-Cola Company, and plastics industry associations such  as Plastics Europe and the American Chemistry Institute, the  conference was the first major international effort to  tackle the issue in 11 years. The end result was the Honolulu Commitment, which invited  everyone to work on 'a global platform for the prevention,  reduction and management of marine debris' called the  Honolulu Strategy. Too little, too late?The contents of the one-page Honolulu Commitment were  bitterly fought over by representatives from industry,  environmental groups, and governments.  In the end, they  could only agree to share information, improve awareness of  the problem and to advocate for the improvement of waste  management worldwide. This might not look like a breakthrough, but a professional  meeting planner said they'd never encountered a group with  such diverse and strongly held opinions. Will there be less plastic and other debris in the oceans a  year from now as a result of this conference and the  resulting commitment?No one seemed to think so.  Not even the marine debris  experts from the National Oceanic and Atmospheric  Administration (NOAA) that helped to organise the Honolulu  conference would say there will be less trash next year. 'We are all in personal agreement to reduce the amount of  marine debris,' conference co-organiser David Osborn of the  United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) in Nairobi said  at the conclusion of the conference Mar.  25. Everyone was prepared to meet the targets and goals in the  Honolulu Commitment, Osborn said. However, there are no specific targets or goals.  Among other  things, the document invites stakeholders to 'commit to'  sharing information and to setting targets for reducing  marine debris. The next international meeting to presumably set the  detailed targets of the Honolulu Strategy is at least four  years in the future, say conference organisers. Impacts on humans and marine animalsAt least 267 marine species worldwide are affected by  entanglement in or ingestion of marine debris, including 86  percent of all sea turtles species, 44 percent of all  seabird species and 43 percent of all marine mammal species. Now there is growing concern over the potential impact on  human health of toxic substances released by plastic waste  in the ocean.  Small particles (known as 'microplastics'),  made up of disintegrating plastic items or lost plastic  pellets used by industry, may accumulate contaminants linked  to cancer, reproductive problems and other health risks. Scientists are studying whether these contaminants can enter  the food chain when microplastics are ingested by marine  animals. 'The impact of marine debris today on flora and fauna in the  oceans is one that we must now address with greater speed,'  said Achim Steiner, executive director of UNEP, in a  statement. 'We need to address marine debris collectively across  national boundaries and with the private sector, which has a  critical role to play both in reducing the kinds of wastes  that can end up in the world’s oceans,' said Steiner. Captain Moore disagrees.  'We have to withdraw from the  corporate materialistic economy.  You can't work within, it  doesn't work.  We have to leave it behind and create local,  sustainable communities that have no need for plastics or  packaging,' he said. Moore's foundation has created market gardens that provide  local jobs and builds hyper-local communities, he says. To help the oceans, what is really needed is to 'shut down  the spigot of stuff we're making,' he said, adding: 'You  don't bail out an overflowing bathtub without turning off  the tap first. '