My decision to visit Fukushima - the area worst hit by the massive quake,  tsunami and nuclear power accident on Mar.  11 - was taken one afternoon last  week after a long meeting with scientists. The invitation to accompany the scientists on a private fact-finding mission to  Fukushima was irresistible.  The scientists and engineers who gathered that  day, had, for decades, harboured misgivings over reactor safety design and  policies and were active in the ongoing debate over the future of nuclear  energy in Japan. 'There is a dire need for a real time radiation monitoring network to be set up  in areas affected by the damaged Fukushima Daiichi Nuclear power plant,'  Atsuto Suzuki, head of the high-energy accelerator research organisation at  Tsukuba University, explained.  'This is where our expertise can begin to play  a role. 'We started our journey at 6am, armed with bottles of mineral water, clothing  that could be discarded before our return to Tokyo, and special facemasks to  protect us from radiation when we approached the 20-kilometre exclusive  zone around the damaged reactors. Around our necks dangled radioactive dosimeters, resembling large  thermometers.  The machines would show accumulated microsieverts of  radiation contamination on our bodies and instructions were given that we  carry them all the time to record the rise in the figures while noting the exact  locations. 'Our own documentation of radioactive material is key to understanding the  Fukushima accident,' explained Yoichi Tao, a physicist specialising in risk  management design, who is now retired.  He is also a graduate from Tokyo  University. But Tao is not part of the cosy group of experts who have guided Japan’s  ambitious post-war nuclear power industry.  Instead, having experienced the  atomic bombing of Hiroshima when he was just six years old, the scientist,  contends the bitter truth that Japan had chosen to ignore till today, was that  fool-proof safety in nuclear power is simply a 'myth'. 'It is time,' he explained, 'to embark on a clearer definition of the complex  concept of safety.  This calls for research from diverse perspectives - the  views of residents, independent opinions, as well as taking in an assessment  on the impact of the accident on other countries. 'The three-hour drive to Fukushima was hauntingly poignant.  With most of the  motorways now open for traffic, we passed the breathtaking scenery that  marks Japan’s northern region - mountains dotted with pristine pine forests  on one side of the road and the pale blue, now serene, ocean glistening on  the other.  Sharp gusts of chilly air wrapped our car on a near empty road, a  sign of the lost appeal of Fukushima - which had been up till now a tourist  destination boasting therapeutic hot springs and fresh seafood. DevastationA harrowing scene awaited us at Iwaki, our entry point into Fukushima.  Iwaki,  a bustling coastal fishing city had borne the full brunt of the tsunami, with  some waves as high as 14 metres. We stopped at Yotsukura hamlet where half the population of 1,000 had  suffered fatalities, were still missing, or had lost their homes, fishing boats  and cars. People, protected with masks, appeared dazed while they pulled at piles of  washed out rubble in a feeble attempt to reconstruct.  'The community is still  scattered in evacuation sites because shops continue to lack food and water  and there is a severe shortage of gasoline,' explained Yuuji Kojima, head of  the rescue operation in the local municipality. The afternoon schedule was to get as close to the nuclear disaster as possible  and the route we selected was not along the coast but inland.  Getting closer  to the vicinity, we passed miles of deserted villages where dogs and cattle -  abandoned by their owners - walked past shuttered houses and broken roads. The sky had begun to darken and we feared rain that would worsen our risk of  contamination.  We pulled on our masks and another layer of clothes.  Then we  watched our monitors. Passing the 30-kilometre limit, a recent extension of the risk zone ordered by  the government, we reached Miyakoji-machi, once a lush farming area, now  turned a ghost village. A police car stood at the entry point and ordered our car to stop.  Officers  explained politely but firmly that only government officials or the Tokyo  Electric Power Company - operator of the Fukushima nuclear power plant -  were permitted inside.  We pulled the car aside and kept the engine running  while scanning the area for a suitable site for the scientists to set up their  monitoring equipment. Rain had turned to snow.  Inside the darkening car, our monitors had begun to  climb - mine was showing an accumulated 325 sieverts, the equivalent of  almost one chest x-ray already. Evacuation CentresThe most excruciating experiences during our visit were in the two evacuation  centres we visited. Located in Tamura-town, the first contained 800 local residents who were  packed into a large gymnasium.  It was not the tsunami, but the accident in  the nuclear power plant they had tolerated for the past 40 years, that had  devastated their lives. Cardboard linings demarcated tiny spaces for families.  Old people covered in  blankets lay in heaps off to one side. Wanting to find out for myself, I deliberately avoided wearing the slippers  given to guests who were asked to remove their shoes at the entrance.  My  feet froze almost instantly, reflecting the discomfort of the nuclear refugees  who have lived on the cold and damp floor for weeks. Portable toilets at the other refugee centre were situated outside the building,  making visits during the freezing nights a nightmare for the elderly.  A lone  doctor at the centre described streams of patients seeking medical assistance.   'The authorities had promised us for years everything was safe.  We do not  believe them anymore,' she explained, declining to be photographed or  identified.  She hesitated to be overtly critical of their situation, preferring to  focus her attention on the sick. Lessons LearnedAs Japan struggles to contain the world’s second most catastrophic nuclear  power accident, the public here is calling for an alternative energy model. This marks the beginning of an unprecedented effort of the expanding  network of scientists and designers in Japan - who are also reaching out for  advise from their counterparts in the United States and Europe - to develop  what some call the world’s most comprehensive study on safety. For now, though, Tao and his team are concentrating on negotiating their way  into the tightly controlled bureaucratic systems here that have long resisted  outside intervention - one of the more troubling aspects of Japan’s economic  development which now lays exposed by the disaster. Returning to Tokyo, late at night, we wondered aloud what lessons had Japan  learned from the disaster.  We asked Tao, what would come next.  'The  answers will take time,' he said.  'More important right now is maintaining a  collective effort to contain the nuclear tragedy that must involve both  proponents and opponents of nuclear energy technology. 'After more than 20 years in Japan, I knew Tao and his community of  concerned scientists were right.  At a time of tragedy, Japanese wisdom had  won.  First things first, and only then can the right platform be established to  debate the larger challenges. 