In the past few years, United Nations headquarters in New York  has undergone a transformation.  Besides renovating the entire  building, the U. N.  is trying, as a leading international  organisation, to take more responsibility and set an example  for environmentally-friendly, sustainable practices by  implementing such changes as cutting back on printing, posting  more documents online, and creating water-saving measures. But while the organisation is moving in the right direction,  the pace of change has been slow.  Transparency and  accountability, and high levels of consumption, are also  persistent issues. 'When I became secretary-general, I made climate change one  of my top priorities,' Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon said in  2010.  'Climate change affects everything the U. N.  does —  poverty, peace and security, development, and human rights. 'Ban has reiterated his stance on the importance of dealing  with global climate change and sustainable energy on  numerous occasions throughout his term.  At the beginning of  this year, the secretary-general listed mitigating climate  change as one of his top priorities for the year 2011. Statements on the importance of mitigating climate change  abound, but information and statistics on the U. N. 's own  environmental practices can be difficult to come by, with  limited information readily available to the public. Statistics also tend to underscore how much is saved and  present comparative data, in some cases disguising how much  energy or paper the U. N.  departments actually consume. Positive but slow growthThe U. N.  and certain branches within it have gradually made  improvements and implemented more 'green' and sustainable  practices.  In 2010, for example, the Department for General  Assembly and Conference Management (DGACM) stopped  distributing printing documents in the Secretariat, instead  posting them online, the culmination of an initiative begun  in the 1990s.  According to the DGACM, this has saved 70  million sheets of paper between 2009 and 2010. Since 2009, the U. N.  has required that all photocopy and  printer paper be 100 percent recycled content, a change that  has 'contributed greatly to the greening of the  organisation,' said the Office of Central Support Services  (OCSS). 'Cool U. N. ', a policy begun in 2008, has raised average room  temperatures in the summer and lowered them in the winter in  an effort to conserve energy.  And in 2010, the U. N.  recycled  nearly 1,000 tonnes of mixed and white paper. Still, as reporters and employees at the U. N.  frequently  observe, documents and reports often find their way into the  trash not long after being issued, with many having gone  unread.  According to the DGACM, U. N.  staff in the  Secretariat consumed just fewer than 60 million sheets of  paper in 2010 solely for photocopying and office printing  purposes. A congested systemThe U. N.  has a longstanding reputation as being inefficient  and more prone to lofty rhetoric than to concrete action.   Earlier this year, the New York Times called it a  'bloated. . .  bureaucracy' in reference not only to the  hundreds of U. N.  umbrella organisations whose missions often  tend to overlap, but also to the staggering amounts of  documents and reports printed regularly at its offices  around the world. The DGACM disagrees, saying the U. N.  has 'a longstanding  commitment to our environment - to ensure that it becomes  more efficient in its operations and in its use of energy  and resources. 'U. N.  officials did not answer repeated questions regarding  how much money had been saved in the switch from printed to  online documents.  Rather, the OCSS insisted, 'The switch  from print to web was done, of course, to contribute to the  secretary-general's goal of climate neutrality. 'Possibilities for the futureThe Capital Master Plan, a five-year, 1. 87-billion-dollar  project to renovate the U. N.  headquarters in New York,  includes various measures that will ultimately improve the  U. N. 's environmental performance through improvements to  ventilation systems, the use of high efficiency lights, and  the implementation of a rainwater harvesting system to  reduce consumption of fresh water, among other new measures  and requirements. Overall these changes are predicted to reduce the U. N. 's  carbon footprint by 45 percent.  Completion of the project is  scheduled for 2013. In the meantime, activists say the U. N.  has a responsibility  uphold the values it preaches. 'A building like the U. N.  headquarters, which is a global  symbol of cooperation, presents a remarkable opportunity to  showcase how energy efficient buildings can contribute to  the growth of low-carbon mega cities,' Andy Darrell, New  York regional director and the Environmental Defense Fund's  (EDS) deputy director of its national energy programme, told  IPS. The EDS is a non-profit organisation that works to find  cost-efficient solutions to the world's environmental  problems. 'Virtually any environmental issue can be positively  affected by the way we design and use our buildings,' he  added. The fact that major changes to decrease UNHQ's energy  consumption have only begun in the past few years suggests  that the U. N.  is certainly not the vanguard of  environmentally-friendly measures. Although major change always takes time and no organisation  is perfect, the implementation of sustainable practices is  not just an issue in itself but may also represent many of  the infrastructural issues embedded within the U. N.  system. 