Led by countries like Indonesia, 48 developing nations are rolling out a range of  pledges to voluntarily cut their respective emissions of greenhouse gases (GHG)  by 2020, the year climate scientists say the earth’s rising temperature should  peak by if an environmental catastrophe is to be avoided. Indonesian negotiators confirmed during a U. N.  climate change conference  here that Jakarta is prepared to cut its GHG emissions by 26 percent on its  own accord.  But that is not all: the world’s most populous Muslim country is  prepared to increase emissions cuts to 41 percent if it receives development  assistance that industrialised nations have committed to providing. 'It is a pledge that sends out an important message: Indonesia is prepared to  do its share to shoulder the burden of reducing greenhouse gases,' says  Shalimar Vitan, economic and justice campaigns coordinator for the East Asia  office of Oxfam, the British humanitarian agency.  'It also is informing the  citizens of the country that Indonesia is eyeing a low carbon development  agenda. ''To cover the cost of the initial cuts from its own resources reflects its  recognition that developing countries have a common but differentiated  responsibility towards the global climate change agenda,' Vitan told IPS. Indonesia’s affirmation here, at the first of three rounds of climate talks this  year ahead of a U. N.  climate summit in the South African city of Durban in  November, marks a significant shift from what a country currently ranked as  the fifth highest emitter of GHGs - after China, the United States, India and  Brazil - had pledged previously.  Following the 2007 U. N.  climate summit it  hosted on the resort island of Bali, Indonesia had said it would only focus on  slashing its deforestation rates. Smaller developing countries are doing their part as well, reveal experts at  Climate Analytics, a think tank based in Potsdam, Germany, which runs a  website monitoring emissions commitments and actions.  The Maldives,  Bhutan, Papua New Guinea and Costa Rica have been singled out for their  ambitious pledges to slash GHG emissions significantly, reveals the Climate  Action Tracker at www. climateactiontracker. org. The Maldives, an archipelago of islands in the Indian Ocean, has been  described as a ‘role model’ by Climate Analytics for its 'declared intention to  become climate neutral by 2020.  The South Asian nation intends to 'apply for  [foreign development assistance] but states that their pledge is voluntary,  unconditional to external support. ''For most developing countries, it is an attempt to demonstrate what they are  doing, and a signal to the developed countries that they want to see more  ambitious emission cuts,' Marion Vieweg, climate policy analyst at Climate  Analytics, told IPS.  'From the political side, it is the right signal to send to this  process. 'The significance of this trend has exposed a fault line at the Bangkok talks,  pitting negotiators of the developing world - who represent the largest bloc  as part of the 131-member Group of 77 (G77) and China - against those of  the developed world.  Environmental diplomats from the G77 have been  pressing their counterparts from the richer nations to make a political  commitment to guarantee that they will meet their obligations towards GHG  emission cuts under the second phase of the Kyoto Protocol, from 2013  onwards. The 1997 Kyoto Protocol is the world’s only international treaty that, since  entering into force in 2005, binds 37 industrialised nations and the European  Community to slash their GHG emissions to curb the rise of global warming. The first phase of the protocol - a key pillar for the U. N.  Framework  Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) - runs out in 2012.  By then the  developed world was expected to slash their emissions by five percent,  measured against 1990 levels. 'We need to hear [developed] countries say they are going to comply to the  second commitment period under the Kyoto Protocol,' asserted a visibly  frustrated Pablo Solon Romero Oroza, the head of Bolivia’s delegation here,  during a discussion on the future of the protocol.  'Developing countries are  doing more to cut emissions without legal obligations than developed  countries. 'The prospect of developed nations meeting their treaty obligations under the  second phase of the protocol - with an increased level of emission cuts - has  come under a cloud of uncertainty at the climate talks here. 'A political commitment [by the developed countries] towards the second  commitment period is very important; it focuses on deliverables,' Rajani  Ranjan Rashmi, a senior member of India’s negotiating team, told IPS.  'That is  a stepping stone to move forward.  Higher ambitions are needed. 'As it is, the total amount of GHG emissions the developed world is prepared  to slash by 2020 will be between 10 to 15 percent, measured against 1990  levels.  It is a figure far short of the required global emission cuts of 25 to 40  percent that has been stressed by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate  Change (IPCC), the Nobel Peace Prize winning body of climate scientists. 'There is a large gap between pledges - by both developing and developed  countries - and what is needed to keep temperatures below the limit set for  2020,' says Bill Hare, a lead author of the IPCC’s ‘Fourth Assessment Report’  on climate change.  '[Developed] countries could do a few more gigatonne  reductions to help close the gap. 'To keep temperatures from rising two degrees Celsius above pre-industrial  levels, climate change experts like Hare say that global emissions need to  drop to between 40 to 40 billion gigatonnes of carbon dioxide by 2020.   'Three years ago it was 45 billion gigatonnes, and even after the pledges we  are left with a nine billion gigatonne gap. '