Two species of Antarctic penguins have declined sharply over  the past 30 years as their chief food source has been  devastated by a combination of other predators, over-fishing,  and rapidly melting sea ice caused by global warming,  according to a new study released here Monday by the National  Academy of Sciences. Based on studies of Adelie and chinstrap penguins and the  ecosystems that have sustained them dating back to the  1970s, the report found that dramatic declines in krill, the  shrimp-like creatures that depend on sea ice for  reproduction, are chiefly responsible for the more than 50- percent plunge in the flightless birds' populations in the  South Shetland Islands. The Adelie penguins, which favour sea-ice habitat during the  winter, have declined at a 2. 9 percent rate a year over the  last decade, while chinstrap penguins, which favour open  water, have declined by an even greater 4. 3 percent annual  rate over the same period, according to the study. Some scientists had predicted that the decline in sea-ice  habitat in the Antarctic caused by warming air and water  temperatures would have a more negative impact on the Adelie  penguin populations given their greater dependence on sea  ice as a habitat.  Under that so-called 'sea-ice hypothesis', the chinstrap  penguins were expected to increase their population, at  least relative to their Adelie cousins. But the study found that the abundance — or lack — of krill  appears to be playing a greater role in reducing the two  species' populations.  Krill feed on photoplankton that thrive under sea ice.   According to other recent studies, the krill population in  the Southern Ocean has declined by as much as 80 percent  since the 1970s. 'For penguins and other species, krill is the linchpin in  the food web,' according to Dr.  Wayne Trivelpiece, the lead  author and a seabird researcher with the National Oceanic  and Atmospheric Administration's (NOAA) Antarctic Ecosystem  Research Division. 'Regardless of their environmental preferences, we see a  connection between climate change and penguin populations  through the loss of habitat for their main food source,' he  said.  'As warming continues, the loss of krill will have a  profound effect throughout the Antarctic ecosystem. 'The Antarctic is among the fastest warming ecosystems on  Earth.  Mean winter air temperatures have increased by five  to six degrees Centigrade since the 1970s. The warming has reduced both the extent and duration of  winter sea ice on which photoplankton and thus krill - and  ultimately penguins - depend. 'If warming continues, winter sea-ice may disappear from  much of this region and exacerbate krill and penguin  declines,' according to the study. The decline in krill, however, is not due to the  disappearance of sea-ice alone, according to the report,  which also cited commercial fishing for krill by specialised  trawlers beginning nearly 40 years ago and growing  competition for krill by recovering whale and fur seal  populations. Indeed, populations of both Adelie and chinstrap penguins  grew steadily between the 1930s and the 1970s as a result of  the losses sustained by the two sea mammals hunted by  humans. 'Penguins are excellent indicators of changes to the  biological and environmental health of the broader ecosystem  because they are easily accessible while breeding on land,  yet they depend entirely on food resources from the sea,'  according to Trivelpiece. 'In addition, unlike many other krill-eating top predators  in the Antarctic, such as whales and fur seals, they were  not hunted by humans,' he said.  'When we see steep declines  in populations, as we have been documenting with both  chinstrap and Adelie penguins, we know there's a much larger  ecological problem. 'Juveniles in both the Adelie and chinstrap penguins have  proved the most vulnerable to the loss of krill biomass,  according to the report. While in the mid-1970s, about 50 percent of young penguins  would survive their first year, only 10 percent survive now. 