As the one-year anniversary of the record-breaking BP oil  spill in the Gulf of Mexico approaches, mental health experts  and social scientists warn of decades of impact on Gulf  residents. On Apr.  20, 2010, the Deepwater Horizon oil rig exploded, triggering a  months-long disaster that would end only after at least 4. 9 million  barrels of oil, and at least 1. 9 million gallons of toxic chemical  dispersants, had been injected into the Gulf of Mexico. The environmental destruction, while massive, is still only in the  beginning stages, and experts warn that it will take decades to see  the full consequences. For Gulf residents, fishermen, and business owners, the same amount  of time is expected for their struggles with depression, anxiety,  anger, fear, and other psychological impacts directly attributed to  this human-made disaster. 'People are on edge,' Dr.  Janet Johnson, an associate professor of  psychiatry at Tulane University, told IPS.  'People are feeling grief.   I'm hearing of physical illnesses related to the oil and people are  worried about losing their home, their culture, their way of life. ''People are becoming more and more hopeless and feeling helpless,'  Dr.  Arwen Podesta, a psychiatrist at Tulane University in New  Orleans, told IPS.  'They are feeling frantic and overwhelmed.  This is  worse than [Hurricane] Katrina.  There is already more post-traumatic  stress disorder (PTSD) and more problems with domestic violence,  threats of suicide and alcohol and drugs. 'Dr.  Podesta, who also works in addiction clinics and hospitals, said,  'It's a remarkably similar experience to that of the stressors of  Katrina.  There is an acute event, but then a long-term increase in  hopelessness with every promise that is broken.  Like a promise for  money to rebuild a life, then people are put through red tape and  each time they fail to move forward, they take five steps back in  their psychological welfare. 'Many of the broken promises Dr.  Podesta refers to stem from the lack  of adequate financial compensation for those who have suffered  financial losses directly because of the disaster. Kenneth Feinberg, the so-called compensation czar of BP's  20-billion-dollar compensation fund, only paid out 3. 6 million  dollars in claims in the last year.  Feinberg's firm has been paid  over one million dollars per month to administer the fund.  Sociologists studying the current BP disaster, along with other  human-made disasters, make a distinction between 'natural' and  'technological' catastrophes. 'What we find in our field when we study technological disasters,  i. e. , human-made disasters, is that the impacts are chronic,' Dr.   Anthony Ladd, a professor of sociology at Loyola University,  explained to IPS.  'They don't really end,' Dr.  Ladd explained.  'With a natural  disaster, like Hurricane Katrina, people move through it.  They  actually end up building a stronger community, there's more social  capital [trust] going on in the community and people find they have  to rely on each other. ''But with technological disasters, you don't get that.  It's a very  different spiral into a malaise, into anxiety, into a feeling that  there is no end in sight.  You don't know when the impacts are going  to stop,' he said. Oil and tar balls continue to wash ashore across Louisiana,  Mississippi, and Alabama, along with dead newborn dolphins and  endangered sea turtles.  The fishing and tourism industries are  suffering, and residents have been shown they cannot trust their  local, state, or federal government to deal adequately with this  ongoing crisis. Dr.  Ladd, whose major area of research centres around the impacts of  environmental disasters on communities, draws direct parallels  between the BP oil disaster and the Exxon Valdez disaster.  'You don't know when the BP cheque is going to show up in the mail,  if ever,' he said.  'You don't know when the feds and the state are  going to do their thing toward recovery.  It's a chronic unending  spiral of people into often deeper and deeper levels of anxiety, and  research shows that one of the major sources of anxiety is the  litigation process itself. ''So on top of everything else the disaster throws at you, then you  have the decade-long experience of trying to litigate your way back  to your economic livelihood or trying to get some kind of economic  compensation for what you've lost and of course that never comes,' he  said. Using the 1989 Exxon disaster as an example of this, in 2008 a  corporate-friendly Supreme Court took the original five-billion- dollar judgment against Exxon from 1994 and ended up granting only  one-tenth the amount, 500 million dollars, to the citizens of  Cordova, Alaska. 'So they weren't able to save their businesses and many weren't able  to stay in the community,' Dr.  Ladd said.  'The litigation process  itself is a huge source of anxiety and we're not anywhere near seeing  what that's going to be like in this case, given that the dimensions  of this disaster are way beyond what we saw in Alaska. 'Dr.  Irene McIntosh, an associate professor at the University of South  Alabama, works as a counselor/educator. 'After a storm you can do something,' Dr.  McIntosh told IPS.  'But  with this, you really are at the mercy of BP and the folks in charge,  as to how much you can do.  So it's a very disempowering sense that is  prevalent. 'Dr.  McIntosh admits to feeling much of the same anxiety and anger  that people she has listened to are experiencing. 'I don't know that I've ever seen the level of distrust of any  government entity in the people here,' she said, 'I don't believe any  of these [officials] either.  After being lied to so efficiently and  thoroughly for so long, and I mean shut down and told you cannot talk  about this, I'm cynical.  I'm furious, and there is nothing I can do. 'Dr.  McIntosh told IPS she is concerned about the long-term  psychological impacts of this disaster.  'That is what I'm concerned most about because any time you're under  long-term stress, whether it's economic, you're losing your home or  boat and your business, then those translate into experiences of  depression, increased family chaos, increased difficulty with  interpersonal relationships and a decrease in self-efficacy that I  can take care of myself and my family,' she said. 'There is anger that exists throughout our region and it's an anger  of feeling betrayed by those who were in charge, that they didn't  make sure there were legitimate steps taken to respond to this,'  McIntosh added. Dr.  Ladd believes recovery from the BP oil disaster will take  decades.  'We need to stop thinking of this as a sprint and think of it as a  marathon.  This disaster and its impacts are going to go on for at  least a decade and it could be more.  It's hard to put into words the  astronomical ways in which this disaster is likely to affect the Gulf  Coast. ''The total number of years this will affect us is unknown,' Dr.   Podesta said, adding, 'However, it could affect us for possibly 20 to  30 years. '