Countries around the lower Mekong have failed to reach a consensus on a  controversial proposal that could see Laos build the first hydropower dam on  this part of the vital river. Instead, representatives from Laos, Cambodia, Thailand and Vietnam agreed to consult with their  respective governments on how to proceed.  However, the final decision still rests with Laos, meaning  the South-east Asian country’s divisive proposal to dam a stretch of the Mekong in northern Laos could  well push forward regardless of opposition from its neighbours or environmentalists. A meeting in Vientiane Tuesday marked the end of a mandatory six-month consultation process  involving Laos and its neighbours.  Under the multilateral Mekong River Commission (MRC), which the  four countries formed in 1995 as a means of promoting sustainable development on the shared  waterway, any country building projects on the mainstream river must hold consultations in affected  countries. The issue has exposed rifts between Laos and Vietnam, traditionally close allies.  Vietnamese officials  have warned that the dam, planned for Xayaburi province in northern Laos, could have significant  impacts downstream. In a statement issued by the MRC following Tuesday’s meeting, Vietnamese officials said they had  'deep and serious concerns' about the project.  Le Duc Trung, director general of Vietnam’s National  Mekong Committee, said Laos’s assessments of the dam’s far-reaching effects have been inadequate.   He called for all dam proposals for the lower Mekong, including Xayaburi, to be shelved for 10 years. 'The deferment would enable the country to secure better understanding and the confidence of the  public and local communities,' he was quoted as saying. In their official responses, both Cambodia and Thailand called for the current consultation process to  be extended.  Cambodia said there was a need to study how mainstream dams would affect the  environment beyond Laos’s borders and that mitigation measures needed to be more clearly  developed. Though it stands to be on the receiving end of the power the 1260-megawatt Xayaburi project would  generate, Thailand said the six-month consultation process has been insufficient and that it was  worried how people who depend on the river will be affected. 'We would like to see that public views and concerns are well taken into consideration,' Jatuporn  Buruspat, director general of the Thai Department of Water Resources, said as part of Thailand’s official  response. Laos itself argued against formally extending the consultation process, saying that any new studies  would take much longer than six months. 'We appreciate all comments, but we will consider to accommodate all concerns,' Viraphonh Viravong,  head of the Lao delegation to the consultations, said in a statement issued by the MRC. In the statement, the Lao official suggested the project would comply with MRC’s design guidelines and  conform to international standards. 'Major impacts on navigation, fish passage, sediment, water quality and aquatic ecology and dam safety  can be mitigated at acceptable levels,' the statement read. However, a series of reports have called such assurances into question. Several expert working groups the MRC put together to examine the Xayaburi proposal have  highlighted problems with elements of the plan. An MRC summary of the concerns noted that the current project design does not in fact meet  international best practices or even the MRC’s own guidelines for water quality and ecosystem health. And a loss of sediment caused by the dam’s reservoir, the report stated, could see it lose 60 percent of  its capacity solely due to sedimentation within 30 years.  The Laos government has awarded a 29-year  concession to a Thai firm to build and operate the dam.  That means the dam’s production could be  significantly reduced by the time Lao authorities take control. An analysis released by the conservation group WWF this month called Laos’s original environmental  impact assessment and feasibility study for the project 'substandard'. The analysis said the EIA only identified five migratory species in the Mekong when there are more than  200 species that use parts of the river for their spawning grounds, including 70 migratory species.  The  EIA also doesn’t take into account how the loss of fish abundance will affect communities living  downstream of the dam, the analysis stated. And the project’s proposed 'fish passage facilities' — mitigation measures meant to ensure species can  bypass the dam on their migratory routes — meet only four out of 30 of the MRC’s basic design  guidelines for the lower Mekong region, the WWF report said. 'The gaps of the assessment lead to the conclusion that the Xayaburi EIA does not meet the  international standards for environmental impact assessments,' the WWF analysis stated.  'The Xayaburi EIA does not answer questions about the nature, magnitude and extent of possible  impacts of the project, or concludes without evidence that these impacts would be insignificant. 'The MRC has not specified a new timeframe for reaching a final decision.  But conservationists  campaigning against the proposed dam nonetheless welcomed Tuesday’s non-decision. 'Today the Mekong River has gotten a much-needed but temporary reprieve,' Ame Trandem, the  Mekong campaigner for the group International Rivers said in a statement.  'The Mekong River is a  valuable shared resource and the Xayaburi dam’s trans-boundary impacts require agreement between  the region’s governments and the public. 'But even though the six-month consultation that just wrapped up was mandatory, it is not legally  binding.  That means Laos could still proceed with its plans for the Xayaburi dam even if its neighbours  are vehemently opposed to it. An MRC spokeswoman said the issue must now be put before the MRC council, which meets once a  year.  Its next scheduled meeting is not until October or November, she said.  And there are no  guidelines stipulating that Laos cannot begin construction of the dam before then. Already this week, media reports suggested Lao authorities have already begun construction around  the dam site, even though the consultation process was still under way.  The Bangkok Post reported  observing major roads to the area under construction as well as villagers who were anticipating  relocating to make way for the dam. The planned Xayaburi project is the first of 11 dams Mekong countries have proposed for the lower  portion of the river, which winds its way from China’s Yunan province, alongside Burma and Thailand,  through Laos and Cambodia before emptying into Vietnam’s Mekong Delta.  