Behind the rusting zinc sheets covering the gates to his  inner-city home, Norman Hamilton is one of the army of  backyard gardeners who have been called to action in Jamaica's  latest efforts to improve food security. The initiative, Agriculture Minister Christopher Tufton said  recently, could slash food imports by as much as 45 percent.  Jamaica  imports more than 60 percent of its food. In just over 30 months, Hamilton's hobby has become his main source  of income and nutrition.  On little over a quarter acre of land ringed  by fruit trees, the young farmer plants a variety of vegetables and  tubers, raises goats and keeps chickens for eggs and meat.  He  provides for his household and the rest he sells from a stall on the  corner. The 29-year-old construction technician and trainee photographer told  IPS that he began farming in his backyard to supplement his largely  vegetarian diet.  It was, he said, a combination of the high cost of  vegetables, unemployment and the free gardening tools that led him to  the programme. The Rural Agricultural Development Authority's (RADA) focus on  backyard gardening took centre stage at a time when exporting nations  rationed supplies in the face of shortages and rising prices spawned  food riots in some 30 countries around the world. Amidst job losses, rising food prices and farmers' struggles to  rebound from crop losses and damages associated with severe weather  conditions, Tufton told Jamaicans, 'What we have clearly realised  over the last 12 to 14 months is that the erratic nature of the  marketplace makes our people vulnerable. 'The National Food Security Programme was launched in 2008 with the  distribution of hundreds of gardening kits containing fertiliser,  vegetable seeds and information pamphlets.  It was the start of what  would become a multi-pronged, multi-partner initiative to enhance the  productivity of the nation's food producers. These days, small and backyard farmers benefit from a range of  programmes and resources to train, market, manage gluts and introduce  new technologies, whilst agro-processors can now access low-cost  loans.  The initiatives, Tufton told a local newspaper recently, have  reduced Jamaica's food import bill from 800 million dollars in 2008  to 661 million dollars last year.  He wants it even lower. 'Our position is that where we can replace or substitute, this offers  tremendous value in both job creation, foreign exchange savings and  the vulnerability of over-dependence on imports,' Tufton said a day  after the launch of a national 'Eat Jamaican' campaign in March this  year. The campaign is funded by the European Union and implemented by the  U. N. 's Food and Agriculture Organisation (FAO). The injection of a 250,000-dollar grant through the FAO's 2008  Initiative on Soaring Food Prices boosted local cash crops - mostly  for short-term production - through the provision of seeds and  fertiliser for the weather-fatigued small farmers. A two-year, 5. 9 million euros European Union-funded, FAO-administered  Food Security Project that began in 2009 provided RADA with the much- needed technical and financial support for small and urban farmers. Dr.  Gillian Smith, the FAO project manager, told IPS last year that  the scheme offers short- to medium-term support to the Ministry of  Agriculture/RADA for ongoing projects in 14 strategic areas.  It was,  she said, designed to improve the access of rural and urban poor to  safe, affordable and nutritious food through by boosting the  production and use of locally grown foods. Projects include rice growing, a project to increase the production  of roots and tubers; establish tissue culture production facilities;  setting up green houses to produce seedlings for vegetable growers;  improved irrigation as well as storage and packing facilities for  farmers.  Some 5,000 small farmers and 2,000 peri-urban dwellers  should benefit. Come May, yet another component to introduce hydroponics to several  communities through 18 test plots will be launched under the scheme,  RADA's training manager Bridgette Williams said. But even as short-term agricultural production increases, traditional  sub-sectors like banana, beef, dairy and food fish among others, have  declined significantly.  The impact of cheap imports, the loss of  export markets, high electricity and transportation costs, high  fertiliser costs and the damages sustained from hurricanes and other  severe weather conditions have kept many agricultural sub-sectors  from rebounding, and wiped out others. Interventions up to now have favoured mainly small and mid-sized  farmers.  So in addition to grant funding, farm interests are calling  for significant investments to kick-start declining sectors, improved  protection from cheap agricultural imports and stronger penalties for  praedial larceny - a chronic problem for farmers of all sizes. For fish farmers like Donnie Bunting — the second largest producer on  the island - who have seen their profits and production wiped out,  the current environment and 'the lack of a set government policy on  imports' have been devastating to the sector.  He has seen production  at his farm fall from 30,000 pounds of food fish weekly to 1,500  pounds a week, forcing him to close the processing plant. Farmers want significant investments in agricultural research to  control diseases that could wipe out the gains of sub-sectors such as  citrus.  In the last 10 years, the Citrus Tristeza virus forced the  replanting of most of the island's 20,000-plus commercial acres, and  now Citrus Huanglongbing also known as citrus greening has taken  hold. Others like Roger Turner turned are looking to the local marketplace  and innovation as the way to national food security.  A third  generation beef and dairy farmer, Turner has seen the demise of not  only his cattle, but also the coffee, sugar cane, bananas and citrus  he once planted as a result of low prices, disease and repeated  impacts of extreme weather events. For him, food security lies in adaptation and crop development.  'Crop  development is one way to supply local needs, and to enhance special  products for the export market,' Turner said.  He noted that the  future of local agriculture depends on finding and exploiting  Jamaica's competitive advantage. The government is in no doubt of what needs to be done.  This month,  focus shifted to agro-processing industry, with the launch of a fund  aimed at boosting access to locally grown supplies.  According to  Tufton, the new fund will help to prevent gluts and minimise the  annual post harvest losses of 58. 5 million dollars. 