The clean development mechanism, the Kyoto Protocol instrument that allows  industries in rich countries to earn emission reduction credits by financing  environment-friendly projects in developing countries, is a perverse but at the  moment necessary tool to fight global warming, says a German environmental  expert. Lambert Schneider, expert on climate change policies at the German Institute  for Applied Ecology, and who has been researching the impact of CDM since  its inception, says that the mechanism must be radically reformed or  supplanted by more efficient instruments. 'CDM has raised awareness in developing countries and among investors of  the urgent need of reducing greenhouse gases emissions (GHG) such as  carbon dioxide (CO2) to stop global warming,' Schneider told IPS.  But at the same time, the huge business opportunities associated with CDM  have led to a massive abuse of the tool, 'through the non-compliance of  numerous international agreed environmental and development standards of  the projects in emerging countries such as China and India,' said Schneider. The Kyoto Protocol compels the industrialised countries that ratified it to  reduce their collective GHG emissions by 5. 2 percent compared to 1990  levels.  To this effect, and among other instruments, the Kyoto Protocol  created the CDM to allow industrialised countries to invest in projects that  reduce emissions in developing countries as compensation for unachieved  emission reductions in their own countries. Under this scheme, an energy provider say in China, enjoying financial  support from industrialised countries, might choose to build an efficient, low  CO2 emitting gas-fired power plant, rather than a cheaper, more polluting  coal-fired generator.  The difference in the potential CO2 emission between  the two can be converted into CDM units to be sold to an industrialised  country that is a signatory to the Kyoto protocol.  Although many gases cause global warming, CO2 matters most because it is  emitted in large quantities and has a long atmospheric lifetime.  The energy  sector is generally the largest emitter of CO2 in any country. Chinese energy providers have become the CDM scheme's major beneficiary,  according to the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC).   The agency, based in the German city Bonn, estimated Mar.  7 that by the year  2012 European Union countries and private companies will have invested  more than 10 billion euros (some 12. 5 billion dollars) in Chinese energy  ventures, in the framework of the CDM. Such projects in developing countries qualifying for the CDM are meant to  comply with numerous environmental standards, which are supposed to be  monitored and certified.  The projects must also generate sustainable  development in the recipient countries. But according to Schneider, several problems plague the CDM.  'On the one  hand, numerous projects with overstated environmental achievements have  been approved without proper certification.  On the other hand, numerous  projects, which would have been implemented without the CDM anyway, have  become beneficiaries of the system. ' Several of the projects do not generate  sustainable development, Schneider added. And yet, all these projects, after having been qualified as compatible with the  CDM, generate additional GHG emission rights for industrialised countries or  for private companies, without generating real reduction in emissions.  'At  best, from the perspective of global warming reduction, these projects are a  zero-sum-game,' Schneider said.  But they have become a global business  worth hundreds of millions of dollars. Schneider carried out a study of more than 100 CDM projects for the UN  Climate Change Conference to be held in December in the Danish capital  Copenhagen.  That meeting has been called to formulate a new global regime  of emission reductions to replace the Kyoto protocol, which expires in 2012. Schneider said that in the short term, the CDM monitoring and certification  must be improved considerably.  'Sanctions must be imposed on the  certification agencies when they do not operate properly,' he said.   Furthermore, the agencies' independence must be enhanced.  'They should be  paid by the UN agencies involved in the Kyoto protocol, rather than by their  clients. 'Eventually, Schneider said, the CDM must be eliminated, because it does not  lead to a reduction of emissions; it only brings a trade-off between potential  emissions avoided in developing countries and a real reduction in emissions  in industrialised countries. 'The new international regime to be discussed in Copenhagen must foresee  real reduction of emissions in emerging economies,' Schneider said.  'To that  end, the CDM must leave place for other more efficient mechanisms, such as  emission trade. 'Schneider's conclusions corroborate the findings of earlier studies.  Researcher Michael Wara found in an investigation carried out at Stanford  University in 2007 that 'there is near unanimous agreement that the CDM has  succeeded in engaging many buyers and sellers and. . . reducing emissions of  the six Kyoto Protocol gases (CO2, methane, nitrous oxide, hydro  fluorocarbons, perfluorocarbons and sulphur hexafluoride). ' But he said that 'in other, and perhaps more important ways, the CDM is  failing to deliver results.  Initially, the market was expected to create strong  incentives to invest in infrastructure for low-carbon energy in developing  countries.  Yet a detailed look at CDM projects producing and selling credits  reveals that nearly two-thirds of emissions reductions involve neither CO2  nor energy production. 'According to Wara, for the period beyond 2012, signatories to the Kyoto  protocol should recognise that measures additional to the CDM are needed to  set the developing world on a path towards a sustainable energy future.   These must include substantial increases in technology investment,  agreements to share low-carbon technologies, a commitment to fostering resilient energy  markets, and security arrangements so that it is in the interest of key  developing nations to foster low-carbon economic growth.   