The Democratic People's Republic of Korea (DPRK) lived through  a famine that killed, at conservative estimates, nearly a  million people in the 1990s, and is now nearing the brink of a  second food disaster, according to an extensive study  conducted this year by the United Nations World Food Program  (WFP). In February and March, the WFP, in conjunction with the Food and  Agriculture Organization (FAO) and the U. N.   children's agency UNICEF,  traveled widely across the North Korean peninsula, venturing into 40  counties in 11 provinces, surveying households, examining granaries  and studying nutrition rates. The findings, released late March in the Rapid Food Security  Assessment (RFSA) report, were dismal: 3. 5 million people  currently  exist in states of severe malnutrition and the dwindling food  supplies are slated to run completely dry by the end of year,  essentially condemning well over 15 percent of North Korea's  population of 22 million to starvation. 'We face a critical window to get supplies into the country and reach  the millions who are already hungry,' WFP Deputy Executive Director  and Chief Operating Officer Amir Abdulla said last week.  'Our primary  concern is for those who are most vulnerable to shocks in the food  supply — children, mothers, the elderly and large families. 'Government rations are at an all-time low, the report warned,  currently supplying no more than half of people's daily nutritional  needs.  Families receiving rations - 68 percent of the population,  according to the WFP's 2010 Crop and Food Security  Assessment Mission  (CFSAM) report — are cutting food intake down to skeletal levels, a  reminder of the 'Let's Eat Two Meals a Day' campaign after heavy  flooding in the 1990s forced the government to cut rations by 50  percent. Meanwhile, North Korea has faced its most bitterly cold winter in six  years.  Crop loss, combined with DPRK's inability to acquire adequate  cereal imports, as well as an outbreak of foot-and-mouth disease —  which has so far infected more than 10,000 oxen, milk cows and pigs,  according to state-run media reports — have pushed DPRK to the  precipice of another humanitarian tragedy. Politics impede food aidThe generosity of donor countries has waxed and waned over the last  three decades, largely in response to Jong-il's isolationist  policies, his stockpiling of nuclear weapons and deep scepticism on  the part of aid donors that the supplies sent into the cordoned-off  country actually reach the mouths they were intended for. Two years ago, the United States was North Korea's primary food  donor, supplying 170,000 tonnes between 2008 and 2009.  At the time,  this was still below the WFP's projection that at least 305,000  tonnes were required to keep nutrition rates at a bare minimum by  2010. In the last two years, however, both the United States and South  Korea - whose donations sometimes hit the half-million mark annually  - terminated their aid programmes, adding significant strain to an  already-depleted food supply.  China remains a lead donor of food aid  to the DPRK. Discussing the question 'To Give or Not to Give' at the United States  Institute for Peace (USIP) in Washington Thursday, Andrew Natsios,  former chief administrator of the U. S.  Agency for International  Development (USAID), said that the debate over food aid to DPRK was  too often compounded by discussions of disarmament and arguments  about foreign policy in the 'most policed state in the history of the  world'. 'But if you take the argument that you cannot help a people whose  government you disagree with,' Natsios said, 'the U. S.  wouldn't be  supplying food to any country in the world, and certainly not to  places like Sudan where we are currently engaged in a huge food  donation programme. 'Reminding everyone that former U. S.  president Herbert Hoover donated  60 million tonnes of food to the Soviet Union between 1921 and 1923,  Natsios added, 'We have to help the people without enabling  authoritarian regimes to survive. 'Venerable Pomnyum Sunim, a respected Buddhist monk and human rights  activist, added, 'In a complicated situation like this, we have to  root ourselves firmly in the old principles of humanitarian aid and  ask the simple question: what do we need to do for the people, and  how are we going to do it?'