Better living through using far fewer material resources is  the only possible future, experts agree.  Humanity is pressing  up against the limits of a finite planet to provide resources  like water, oil, metals and food, according to a new report  released Thursday. Higher resource consumption levels will be prohibitively costly or  simply impossible, warns the report by the United Nations Environment  Programme (UNEP). 'Global resource consumption is exploding.  It's not a trend that is  in any way sustainable,' said Ernst von Weizsäcker, co-chair of  UNEP's International Resource Panel. 'We must realise that prosperity and well-being do not depend on  consuming ever-greater quantities of resources,' said von Weizsäcker. The world is running out of cheap and high quality sources of some  essential materials such as oil, copper and gold, the supplies of  which, in turn, require ever-rising volumes of fossil fuels and  freshwater to produce, the report found. During the 20th century, the rate of resource use has increased twice  as fast as the increase in global population.  Now, resources are  being consumed at an even greater rate and are on pace to triple by  2050, the report calculates.  Except there simply aren't enough  resources left on the planet to manage that. The average person in Canada or the United States currently consumes  25 tonnes of key resources every year, while a person living in India  and in most African countries uses just four tonnes, the report  found.  Industrialised countries need to reduce their consumption by making  significant reductions in waste and major improvements in the  efficiency with which they use resources.  At the same time,  developing countries need to create new low-carbon, super-efficient  resource use pathways for their economic development. Developing countries have to change their idea of what development  means in a resource-scarce world.  They need to forge a new resource- efficient, low carbon development path, said Mark Swilling of the Sustainability Institute at the University of  Stellenbosch in South Africa. There is a pressing need for sanitation in much of Africa, but  instead of building expensive Western-style water treatment  infrastructure, countries can use their wetlands and natural  vegetation to provide the same service, Swilling, a co-author of the  report, told IPS. 'We will miss out on these kinds of opportunities if we follow  Western development patterns,' he said. Public infrastructure is the biggest determinant of future energy and  resource use, said Marina Fischer-Kowalski of the Institute of Social Ecology in Vienna. North America's infrastructure, including transportation, sanitation,  food production and so on, are all high-energy, high-material-use  systems, said report co-author Fischer-Kowalski.  They were designed  with the assumption of never-ending access to cheap and plentiful  energy and resources.  Efficiency improvements can be made but it is  more expensive and limits to what can be done. 'Our report calls for an urgent rethink of the links between resource  use and economic prosperity,' Fischer-Kowalski told IPS. At a bare minimum, wealthy countries need to freeze their per capita  consumption and help developing nations follow a more sustainable  path, recommends the report, 'Decoupling natural resource use and  environmental impacts from economic growth'.  Decoupling means  disconnecting economic growth from increasing use of material  resources. Economic theory has long linked rising economic development as  measured by Gross Domestic Product (GDP) to increasing resource use.   However, countries like Japan and Switzerland have far higher GDP per  capita than Australia but they use just 25 percent of the natural  resources per capita that Australians use. Japan has an explicit goal of becoming a 'sustainable society'  focused on low carbon, the reduction, reuse and recycling of  materials, and harmony with nature.  The government has successfully  focused on increasing resource productivity and minimising negative  environmental impacts, the report found. Germany aims to double energy and resource productivity by 2020.   China has declared it will build an 'ecological civilisation' with  resource and environmental concerns as top priorities. 'Decoupling' is a way of getting away from using the GDP to measure  growth and development, said Swilling.  Since GDP is a measurement of  economic activity, disasters like Hurricane Katrina or even a traffic  accident increase GDP. 'GDP measures everything except those things that really matter to  people,' he said. This shift to decoupling 'will require require significant changes in  government policies, corporate behaviour, and consumption patterns',  the report concludes with considerable understatement. Right now, Africa is being hard pressed to sell off its primary  resources to foreign interests.  Many African states are becoming  increasingly dependent on the cash that exports of minerals, timber  and food bring.  Meanwhile the rising costs of such resources are  driving 'land grabs' across the continent, where corporations and  foreign states are buying or leasing vast tracts of land, said  Swilling. 'Grabbing cheap land in Africa has become a popular sport,' he said. Over 50 million hectares of African land has been acquired by foreign  interests in the last 10 years, according to Oxfam and the International Land Coalition, an NGO tracking  the issue.  That's more farmland than Canada has. Much of Africa's soils are degraded and need rehabilitation, not  exploitation, said Swilling.  Food prices are going to rise and this  is going to cause havoc in the future. 'Countries need to see their farmland and soil as a strategic  priority, as part of their national security,' he said. While land grabs rightly captures media attention, most of Africa's  export revenues come from selling off its mineral resources.  That has  to be carefully monitored and at the very least those revenues need  to be invested in education and training and the creation of a  manufacturing sector, said Swilling. Education is crucial, agreed Fischer-Kowalski.  'Investment in human  capital is the key to being able to do more with less,' she said. 