Farming with genetically modified organisms (GMOs) is becoming more  widespread in Kenya due the promotion of biotechnology through clever  schemes, exacerbated by the lack of a legal framework for the  commercialisation of these controversial products. The Kilimo Salama (Safe Farming) insurance scheme not only compensates farmers for losses incurred  due to prolonged drought but also for destruction by excessive rains, according to Rose Goslinga,  insurance coordinator at the Syngenta Foundation for Sustainable Agriculture. The Syngenta Foundation is a not-for-profit organisation attached to the Syngenta Company that  researches and produces GM seeds.  The foundation is involved in the 'Safe Biotechnology Management'  (SABIMA) project aimed at promoting GM technology among small-scale farmers in Ghana, Nigeria,  Burkina Faso, Kenya, Uganda and Malawi. Goslinga explains the scheme in Kenya as follows: farmers that suffer crop losses are compensated  through seed payouts.  Initially, they purchase eight kg of seeds, which is the standardised measure for  sowing one acre piece of land.  The stockist issues the farmer with a code.  The farmer then sends the code to a fixed-line number through the mobile phone short messages  service (SMS), which is then picked and registered at the UAP Insurance Company and the Sygenta  Foundation databases. Every crop season is monitored by a weather station fitted with solar technology to inform the insurance  company of impending crop failure.  Data is then processed to determine the compensation range, she  says. 'If there has been crop failure, each farmer is informed through SMS about the payouts,' says Goslinga.   'The automated weather stations keep the costs down by avoiding the need for expensive field visits to  farms to ascertain risk and loss.  This makes the insurance feasible both for the farmer and the  insurance company. 'So far 12,000 Kenyan farmers have been enrolled in the scheme and, according to the Syngenta  Foundation’s executive director, Marco Ferroni, some 50,000 others are expected to join.  'This initiative has grown from a small pilot programme in 2009 to become the largest insurance  programme in Africa and the first to use mobile phone technology to speed up access and payouts to  rural farmers,' says Ferroni. The Kenya Biodiversity Coalition (KBioC) regards the scheme as part of seed-manufacturing  multinational companies’ renewed appetite to use Kenya as a testing ground for GMOs by offering seeds  to farmers. Wanjiru Kamau, KBioC spokesperson, acknowledges that it is a noble idea to offer insurance to farmers  who continually face crop failure but fidgets when she hears Syngenta is one of the organisations  behind it. 'We doubt if it is in the interest of Kenyans because Syngenta is one of the leading multinational  companies that manufacture GM seeds,' observes Kamau.  'Pro-biotechnology groups resourced by  seed-manufacturing multinationals are exerting a lot of pressure on Kenya’s policymakers to  commercialise GMOs. 'GM technology has made inroads into agriculture in Kenya despite the legal framework not being in  place yet.  As an example, the Bt cotton variety has been tested but Roy Mugiira, acting chief executive of the  National Biosafety Authority (NBA), says his agency cannot yet sanction its release because regulations  on commercialisation of GMOs have not been finalised. According to Mugiira, three sets of regulations on contained use, environmental protection and export  and import transit have been drafted and have to be scrutinised further before approval. But an investigation by KBioC found that a seed variety had been planted by farmers in the Rift Valley  region despite confirmation that it contained a GM strain.  This, according to KBioC, happened before  President Mwai Kibaki had assented to the Biosafety Act in February 2009. 'We suspected that a lot of GM seed, particularly for maize, was being imported from South Africa either  as contaminated maize or plain GMOs,' recalls Kamau.  'We went to the key maize-growing regions and  did random sampling.  We bought the seed and found it was laced with GM strains. 'After submitting the evidence to the agency in charge of seed imports, the Kenya Plant Health  Inspectorate Services (KEPHIS), it emerged that there was no certificate of clearance to prove that the  seeds were not GMOs. 'KEPHIS went public and denied the allegations but we knew from our networks in South Africa that the  agency had not demanded a certificate which would have shown that the import was indeed GM maize  seeds,' says Kamau. 'So even if Kenya has not commercialised GMOs, it is likely that farmers are planting GM seed without  their knowledge,' says Kamau. While GMO proponents deny that GM crops may already be growing on hundreds of Kenya’s small-scale  farms, director of the International Service for the Acquisition of Agri-Biotech Applications (ISAAA) in  Nairobi, Dr.  Margaret Karembu, predicts that 10 African countries will have adopted the technology  before 2015.  ISAAA promotes the use of GM by poor farmers.  