The road to the crucial Rio+20 conference on greening the  world economy next year has hit a setback with the breakdown  of the 19th session of the U. N.  Commission on Sustainable  Development after 10 days of intense negotiations. No decisions were adopted at the session, also known as CSD-19, which  ran from May 2-13 in New York and examined consumption and  production, transport, chemicals, waste management and mining. It was the last time the commission meets before the June 2012 Rio+20  Conference, which will mark the 20th anniversary of the landmark  1992  Earth Summit in Brazil. Negotiations came to a stalemate when the Arab Group and the Group of  77 developing countries and China rejected the draft outcome  document  submitted by the session's chair, László Borbély of Romania, in lieu  of a negotiated text. The G77-China bloc was concerned about the draft's reference to  people living under foreign occupation.  They called for the language  agreed upon at CSD-17, while Western countries preferred terms agreed  upon more recently by the U. N.  General Assembly. Another primary concern was the lack of funding available for the new  policies under consideration. Despite the stalemate, a recurrent theme throughout the meetings was  the urgent need to create an institutional framework for sustainable  development. 'It is our collective responsibility to ensure that the results of  our work here in New York are meaningful on the ground,' Borbély said  at the opening of the high-level segment. This sentiment was shared by many of the Commission's 53 members.   'What we need now is not more speeches, not more text, but more will  to commit to the changes that are needed,' said Grenada's  representative, on behalf of small island nations.  India's secretary of environment and forests, Tishya Chatterjee,  lamented the CSD's lack of a concrete roadmap for the future. 'Rio+20 does not mean Rio 1992 plus 20 years.  No, what it means is  Rio in June 2012 plus 20 years,' he told IPS. Chatterjee had hoped for the adoption of a Ten Year Framework of  Programmes on Sustainable Consumption and Production, or 10YFP, which  would be 'the only permanent outcome of CSD-19'. The 10YFP was initially proposed in Johannesburg in 2002, and was to  be negotiated during the 18th and 19th rounds of the Commission.  It  would provide guidelines for policy implementation and help both  consumers and corporate stakeholders move toward sustainability. Switzerland's ambassador for the environment, Franz Perrez, had hoped  that a 10YFP would provide some depth to the meetings, which often  had 'too great a reach to focus on any specific issues'. He recalled that when the 10YFP was proposed, some countries were  eager to adopt it while others feared it.  'They were afraid of a  machinery coming in and limiting their freedom to maneuver,' he told  IPS.  Perrez speculated that the concerns put forth by the G77 at this  year's conference 'may not have been the real reason' for the group's  opposition to the document.  'The G77 requested several amendments,' he said, 'but was still not  willing to continue to negotiate' when concessions were made. This is not the first time that the G77 has gone head-to-head with  developed countries during climate talks.  Negotiations were  temporarily suspended during the 2009 United Nations Climate Change  Conference in Copenhagen when G77 members walked out in protest. At that time, G77-China spokesman Lumumba Di-Aping said the board was  'advancing the interests of the developed countries at the expense of  the balance of obligations between developing and developed  countries. 'United Nations Environment Program (UNEP) Executive Director Achim  Steiner had hoped that a 10YFP could lead to a new understanding  between developing and developed countries.  To him, a 10YFP would be  'a step in trying to build trust among nations'. 'You cannot ask one part of the world. . .  because it is the one that  has come to the party later, to pay a higher price in making that  transition,' he said.  'It cannot be that the rich part of the world  continues to insist that somehow our boat will sink if you do the  same thing as we do, so please find another boat. 'India's Chatterjee agreed that the 10YFP would help 'ride over humps'  between the developing and developed world. 'Over the 10-year period, it becomes easier to work out any kind of  present differences we may have- North-South, et cetera,' he told  IPS.  But he had hoped that the developed nations would take the lead  with regard to the 10YFP and avoid imposing new constraints on  developing countries. With increasingly frequent impasses at the international level, some  are advocating for individual, bottom-up approaches to sustainable  development.  On Thursday, a panel of experts discussed such  opportunities. 'When things are agreed at a U. N.  level, countries have to take them  back and actually implement them, and that doesn't always happen,'  Sue Riddlestone, executive director of the environmental charity  BioRegional, told IPS.  She called for the empowerment of individual stakeholders.  'Every  country needs to have a plan to enable its citizens,' she said, 'so  that's what we'll be calling for at Rio. ' According to another panelist, Mohan Munasinghe, 'We do not need to  wait for new technologies, laws or infrastructure. 'Munasinghe's initiative, the Millennium Consumption Goals, is  directed at individuals rather than government bodies, and seeks to  address the unsustainable lifestyles of the richest 20th percentile  of the world's population.  'There are a number of things that we know how to do.  We just need to  find a framework for all countries to support these actions,' said  Tariq Bunari, director of the U. N.  Division on Sustainable  Development. For now, no such framework exists, but Swiss Ambassador Perrez told  IPS that internal discussions continue.  Some Commission members are  exploring the possibility of establishing a 10YFP just with a  coalition of willing partners and UNEP.  'It is in our power to pursue a development path that takes a more  balanced and sustainable approach to the world's resources,' said  Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, looking ahead to Rio+20.  'The choice  is ours,' he said, adding, 'We do not have a moment to lose. '