The manatee, or sea cow, is a torpedo-shaped marine mammal that moves  languidly through the tepid waters of the Caribbean, South America and along  the coast, rivers and wetlands from Senegal down to Angola.  In the late 18th  century, one of the manatee's closest and much larger relative, the Stellar Cow,  were hunted to extinction.  Today, the future of the West African manatee may  not be far behind.  Among researchers it is often referred to as 'the forgotten animal', even though it has been around for  over 45 million years.  The West African manatee is one of three manatee types, which includes the  Amazonian and Indian.  All three appear on the United Nations red list of endangered species.  While  there is very little known about the exact numbers or distribution of the West African manatee  specifically, they are believed to be the most threatened of the three groups and continue to be hunted  illegally for their prized meat, hides and bones. Lucy Keith-Diagne is a scientist with the U. S. -based EcoHealth Alliance and has been patiently tracking  these rare creatures for over ten years. 'In Africa, they are the least studied large animal.  I think part of that is they are very mysterious.  They  live in murky water and extremely remote places.  Most people see them dead or in a stew-pot,  unfortunately. 'Manatees are migratory and generally shy, solitary creatures.  They are also slow breeders, mating about  every two years and having only one calf at a time.  Their unusual sightings have, in part, made the  manatees something of an enigma.  Among certain fishing communities in West Africa, they are even  feared. Working with peopleIn Dakar, the environmental NGO, Oceanium, has been working to protect manatees along the Senegal  River and in estuaries and mangroves in the southern part of the country.  El Ali Haida is director and  works on the ground in remote communities with the 'thioubalo' people - those who live by the water. 'The manatee is a very mystic animal,' says Haida.  'In the villages of Casamance, the hunters must  wear many different talismans and perform a ritual that can last up to two hours before they even dare  to hunt the manatee. 'Mamiwata is the name given to the spirit that supposedly lives in the manatee.  This spirit is always  considered to be a mermaid, but according to Keith-Diagne, the interpretations of why she exists differ  across countries. 'In Gabon, it is a beautiful young woman who pulls men underneath the water and takes them to her  lair - never lets them free,' explains Keith-Diagne.  'Basically, I think it is an explanation for fishermen  who drown - they just never come home to their families.  But in Nigeria, mamiwata is a very positive  thing.  If she catches you, she takes you to her lair and then releases you.  Then your family will be  prosperous for the rest of your life.  And then on a totally different perspective, mamiwata is another  name for prostitute in Cameroon.  There are very few places though where the legend translates to the  real animal, in the sense that people respect it enough not to kill it. 'The manatees are herbivores and live off over 60 different species of aquatic and semi-aquatic plants.   Every day they can eat up to 15 percent of their body weight.  Their biggest threats are directed hunting,  unintentional trappings in nets and the construction of underwater dams.  For those who actively hunt  the manatees, they are driven by huge financial incentives. 'The meat from one manatee can weigh between 400 -500 kilogrammes,' says Haida.  'When sold at a  market in Senegal at 2 dollars per kilo, this represents a lot of money. 'In Senegal, as in every other West African country where they are found, the manatees are legally  protected.  Yet, a lack of law-enforcement and a poor understanding about the animal mean the  number of manatees continues to decline. Conservation effortsMomar Sow oversees a manatee conservation project in six West African countries with the NGO  Wetlands.  From his experience working with fishermen across the region, he believes the social  awareness about manatees differs from country to country. 'Fortunately, here in Senegal, as in The Gambia and Guinea, they have a traditional respect for these  species,' says Sow. 'It is very rare to find young hunters.  Most are old.  In many cases, traditional pratices have not been  passed down to young boys.  This is lucky for us if they do not know how to kill manatees. 'According to Sow the 'hot-spot' for manatee hunting is Sierra Leone.  It amazes him, because it is the  only country where he can find people killing manatee as if they were really cows.  He says the mammals  actually come right up to the rice farms to eat the farm. 'In some countries, (the manatee) is considered like a human.  And yet, in some others they just do not  care because of their own personal stories,' explains Sow.  'You have some refugees in these places, so  there the manatee is just considered a meat. 'The work of organizations like Wetlands and Oceanium has been vital to helping build awareness  around this otherwise 'forgotten animal'.  Oceanium has directly helped save 22 manatees in Senegal  and are working with locals to develop eco-tourism projects where tourists pay to see manatees in the  wild. Haida believes this may be the best solution in a country where people are more concerned with  putting food on the table every day than protecting a rare animal for the future. 'Only when the environment allows people to make money will people have incentive to protect their  environment,' he says. 