An international coalition of academics and environmental  activists has launched a global campaign for the creation of a  new U. N.  convention to protect 'mother earth'. With the United Nations fighting a relentless battle against water  pollution, loss of biodiversity, desertification, deforestation,  climate change and a depleted ozone layer, the campaign for a  'Universal Declaration of the Rights of Mother Earth' has taken added  significance. 'It is not too late to change course and improve our relationship with  Mother Earth,' says U. N.  Deputy Secretary-General Asha-Rose Migiro.   'But time is running out,' she warns. Maude Barlow, a lead campaigner for the U. N.  convention and  chairperson of the Council of Canadians, a citizen's advocacy  organisation, said: 'We hope that one day a Universal Declaration of  the Rights of Mother Earth will stand as the companion to the 1948  Universal Declaration of Human Rights as one of the guiding covenants  of our time. ' The campaign has also been boosted by the fact that the United Nations  is commemorating two key environment-related events this year: the  International Year of Forests and the beginning of the International  Decade for Biodiversity. 'It took a long time to get the world to accept the Universal  Declaration of Human Rights,' Barlow told IPS. 'It will not be an easy struggle to have the rights of nature  understood and adopted.  But it will happen one day,' she predicted. Last month, a group of scholars and environmental experts from around  the world launched a new book titled 'The Rights of Nature: The Case  for a Universal Declaration of the Rights of Mother Earth and Wild  Law: A Manifesto for Earth and Justice. 'Speaking at the launch in New York Apr.  21, Shannon Biggs, director of  the community rights programme at Global Exchange, said: 'Today's  environmental laws place commerce above nature, and in so doing they  legalise harm to ecosystems. ' 'We see communities across the world, including the United States,  taking action to change this model in recognition of the rights of  nature, and to protect our environment, our communities and our  future,' said Biggs, author of 'Building the Green Economy: Success  Stories from the Grassroots. 'Addressing the U. N.  General Assembly in April 2009, Bolivian President  Evo Morales made a strong push for the proposed new Convention. And in December, the General Assembly adopted a resolution calling on  all 192 member states to share their experiences and perspectives on  how to create 'harmony with nature'. A draft Universal Declaration of the Rights of Mother Earth was  approved at the World People's Conference on Climate Change and the  Rights of Mother Earth in Cochabamba, Bolivia in April 2010. The draft declaration was formally presented to U. N.  Secretary-General  Ban Ki-moon in May last year. Barlow told IPS the rights of nature are based on the notion that the  natural world is a fully operating system, a community, with its own  laws.  It is therefore necessary for humans to construct laws that are  compatible with the laws of nature. This means promoting human and community development in a way that  protects nature and promotes sustainability, said Barlow, a former  U. N.  Adviser on Water. 'What might it look like if we created laws to give the earth and  other species the right to exist?' she asked.  'If we believe that  rights are inherent, existing by virtue of our creation, then they  belong to all nature, not just to humans. ''We are not talking about every insect or fish, for example, as having  the same kind of individual rights currently understood for humans,'  she added. However, under a system that recognises the rights of nature, it would  be unlawful to drive a species to extinction or to destroy a  watershed. Technically, the Gulf could sue British Petroleum for that disastrous  oil spill.  And the ocean around the nuclear reactor in Japan could sue  the owners, she said.  Asked about the link between indigenous peoples and the protection of  Mother Earth, Barlow said indigenous peoples are in fact, the  inspiration for the declaration and it is no coincidence that it came  out of a summit filled with indigenous leaders in Cochabamba Bolivia  last year. Recognising the rights of nature would essentially open up a whole new  front in the advancement of 'third generation' rights, those rights  dealing with self determination, economic and social development and  collective responsibility to protect and preserve natural resources. 'The rights of nature as a concept is totally compatible with the U. N.   Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples and completely  complements it,' she added. Asked about future plans, Barlow told IPS there are moves to present  the concept, book and declaration to the climate justice community in  Durban in December at the Conference of Parties (COP 17) and to the  water justice movement in Marseilles in March 2012 at the World Water  Forum. She said there are also plans to get the proposed Convention into the  agenda of the Rio+20 conference on the environment in Rio next April. In the end, she said, 'We are trying to say that there is no such  thing as a human right if the earth cannot sustain life and it is no  coincidence that where poor people are dying, so is the water, forests  and air around them. 'The rights of humans and nature are deeply intertwined, and 'we forget  this at our peril', she added.  So far at the United Nations, 'we have had an interactive dialogue on  harmony with nature'. Barlow said the full declaration is probably a way off in terms of  ratification at the United Nations, but several countries, including  Bolivia and Ecuador, have adopted laws recognising these rights and  others are expected to soon follow.  