When leaders of the Group of 8 (G8) industrialised nations  meet in Deauville, France later this week, there is a strong  possibility that politics will take precedence over  traditional socioeconomic issues like food security and  development aid, which are being overshadowed by the Arab  revolution and Palestinian statehood. 'The upcoming G8 likely will be dominated by a range of international  political issues, especially Libya,' predicts Rob Vos, director of  the Development Policy and Analysis Division of the U. N. 's Department  of Economic and Social Affairs. The nuclear plant crisis in Japan, he told IPS, is likely lead to  discussion on stricter international standards. The economic repercussions of the recession in Japan and the global  financial disruption also will be subjects of discussion, as well as  the European sovereign debt crisis.  But the policy implications of  these likely will be left to the larger G20 bloc, he added. A summit meeting of G20 leaders is scheduled to take place in Cannes,  France in November this year. The G8, which comprises Germany, Italy, Britain, Canada, Japan,  Russia, France and the United States, is also expected to place  priority on strengthening its partnership with Africa, including on  issues related to food security and poverty reduction, and the  critical role of agriculture in achieving these goals, according to  the International Food Policy Research Institute (IFPRI). But some of these critical socioeconomic issues may be left for the  G20, which (besides the G8) includes Australia, Mexico, South Korea,  Turkey, and also seven developing countries &#8209; namely Argentina,  Brazil, China, India, Indonesia, Saudi Arabia and South Africa &#8209; plus  the European Union. According to one newspaper report, U. S.  President Barack Obama will  attempt to counter the proposed General Assembly resolution on  Palestinian statehood by trying to convince some of the European  leaders not to vote for the resolution when it comes up at the United  Nations in September. 'But this may be a good try in a lost cause,' says one Asian  diplomat, who points out that some of the major European nations,  including Britain and France, have already hinted they may support  the resolution on Palestinian statehood. Asked whether the G8 has fulfilled most of its past economic pledges,  Vos told IPS: 'As to global commitments to the South, clearly the G8  fell short about 20 billion dollars on aid commitments in 2010 (the  deadline to deliver on the commitments made at the Gleneagles Summit  in 2005). 'Additionally, he said, the G8 also still has to deliver on the  promise of more support for sustainable agriculture to deal with  ongoing the food crisis.  However, he pointed out, this G8 Summit, scheduled to take place May  26-27, does not seem to have this on its agenda. 'So the summit likely will be dominated by international political  issues and I don't expect anything much in terms of new pledges for  supporting developing countries' said Vos, a lead author of the  U. N. 's two flagship reports, 'World Economic and Social Survey' and  'The World Economic Situation and Prospects'. In a statement released early this week, IFPRI Director General  Shenggen Fan said G8 leaders had pledged more than 20 billion dollars  to boost food security and agricultural development. And last year, a multilateral fund, the Global Agriculture and Food  Security Program, was launched with the goal of improving  agricultural production, crop productivity, and food security.  'Although these financial commitments are substantial, challenges  remain,' Fan said. First and foremost, donors need to make good on their promises, as do  African governments themselves. Second, investments in agriculture should reflect a country's  national priorities, contribute to an overall development strategy,  and be supported by good governance and effective policies. Finally, determining the how of agricultural spending is as important  as the how much, he added. Luc Gnacadja, a senior U. N.  advisor, was quoted as saying that the  world's food production system is under stress.  But the critical  links between land degradation, food insecurity, political  instability and migration are often overlooked. 'Examining these links would advance the G8's agenda on partnership  with Africa on peace and security,' he pointed out. Additionally, this will 'concretely advance' the 2009 L'Aquila G8  summit declaration on sustainable development. 'Growing political restlessness, unceasing economic hardships and  increasing environmental vulnerability globally mean a lot is  expected from this year's G8 and G20 summits,' Gnacadja declared. 