For the past quarter century, the United States' relations  with Pacific island nations were framed by the South Pacific  Tuna Treaty, which combines foreign aid, subsidies to the U. S.   fleet of purse-seine fishing vessels and their largely  unfettered access to the islands' waters, which contain the  world's last major stocks of tuna. But last month, after a year of negotiations to extend it, Papua New  Guinea unilaterally abrogated the 1987 treaty, citing a clear U. S.   refusal to address the concerns of the other members. 'Taking a hard line with a group of small, mostly poor friendly  states was a failed strategy,' Phil Kline of Greenpeace, virtually  the only non-governmental organisation to closely track the fishery,  said last week.  'Now the U. S.  is either going to have to make  bilateral arrangements like the other fishing countries or negotiate  a new treaty that meets the requirements of the islands. 'The treaty is unique in the region in that it links development aid  to access to fishing grounds, though such arrangements are common  between European and African states.  The aid totals 18 million dollars a year and is shared by 13  countries.  For some, which receive little money from fishing license  because their waters attract few tuna, it's significant - for others,  like PNG or Kiribati or Micronesia, much less.  In addition, the treaty provides six million dollars a year to pay  most of the vessels' license fees, while the vessels themselves  contribute five million dollars.  It caps the number of vessels at 40,  but does not limit how many days each vessel can fish.  It also  requires Coast Guard planes to search for poachers and other law- enforcement activities. PNG is one of four treaty super-members (the others are Kiribati, the  U. S.  and Micronesia) whose withdrawal from the treaty automatically  abrogates it for all.  Its top fisheries official, Sylvester Pokajam,  is also the chairman of the Parties to the Nauru Agreement (PNA),  which groups the eight islands in whose Exclusive Economic Zones most  of the fish is caught.  'They haven't been listening at all,' said Pokajam, explaining why  his country, with the support of the PNA, ended negotiations to renew  the treaty, which as a result will expire next May. The other treaty members are the Cook Islands, Fiji, the Marshall  Islands, Nauru, Niue, Palau, the Solomon Islands, Tonga, Tuvalu,  Vanuatu and Samoa.  New Zealand and Australia are members but do not  receive aid.  The region attracted growing numbers of purse-seiners after these  ships depleted tuna stocks in the Eastern Pacific, the Atlantic and  the Indian Ocean.  Most tuna are found along the equator. Over the past few years, scientists in the Central and Western  Pacific have warned that catches of bigeye tuna, the most valuable to  sushi lovers after the fast-disappearing bluefin, should be cut by  30percent or the species could collapse and become commercially  extinct because of overfishing from purse-seiners.  These are  industrial ships that can haul a school of tuna weighing more than  100 tonnes at a time. Yellowfin stocks are also significantly reduced and even skipjack,  the main species used for canning, has shown signs of decline. After the Western and Central Pacific Fisheries Commission, which  includes the major fishing nations (Japan, China, Taiwan, Korea,  Spain and the U. S. ), failed to significantly reduce the catch, the  PNA group was created.  By leveraging the contracts its members sign  yearly with all nations except the U. S. , whose rules are set by the  treaty, PNA embarked on a series of unprecedented conservation  measures. These apply to over 200 vessels and include banning fishing in an  area of international waters larger than India, reducing the use of  devices that cause most of the bigeye mortality, creating a system to  monitor by satellite the fishing activity of each vessel and another  system to reduce the number of days fished. But when PNA officials, noting the environment-friendly tone of the  Barack Obama administration, asked U. S.  officials to either adopt the  measures now or at least agree to include them in the treaty after  its current set of rules expire in two years, the U. S.  demurred. 'The U. S.  talks about conservation but behaves differently,' said  Pokajam, the PNA leader. The United States had earlier angered the island governments by  allowing 25 Taiwanese vessels, owned jointly by U. S.  companies and  operating in the Western Pacific, to adopt the Stars and Stripes,  thereby allowing them, under the treaty, to fish without the limits  imposed on the fleets of other countries. The companies promised to deliver more fish to Samoa, whose economy  is tried to its two canneries, said U. S.  Representative Eni  Faleomavaega of Samoa.  But not one ever showed up there. 'And what does the American taxpayer get in return?' wrote  Faleomavaega.  'A depleted tuna stock. 'Whether the U. S.  ends its development aid to the region is unclear.   The State Department declined all requests for comment.  However, in a testimony to Congress last year, William Gibbons-Fly,  the chief State department negotiator for the treaty, said the  foreign aid and law-enforcement cooperation to the region was  'dependent on the extension of the treaty'. Over the past 25 years, the aid of other nations and the access fees  they pay have dwarfed the U. S.  contribution.  Today, New Zealand gives  more aid to the region than does the United States. According to PNA figures, the combined aid and fees the islands  receive per day fished by a U. S. -flagged vessel is about 1,800  dollars, compared to 6,050 dollars for a Japanese one. 