A project to help reforest after the devastation of Hurricane  David 32 years ago has grown into a plan to lift small coffee  farmers out of poverty, all by the introduction of a gourmet  ice cream. Hurricane David hit the Dominican Republic as a Category 5 storm in  1979, killing 2,000 people and wiping out 70 percent of the country's  agriculture.  In 1980, local businessman Manuel Arcenio Urena, working  with the Dominican environmental group Plan Sierra, introduced the  macadamia nut tree  from Australia as a means to both reforest the  island and replenish eroded topsoil.  Because the tree has a shallow  root system, it is capable of holding down precious topsoil. For 15 years, the trees were simply planted.  They began to produce  nuts but the shells were very hard and the nuts were unknown here.   Since there was no market for them, the macadamia nuts - the most  expensive nut on the world market - were left to rot on the ground.   Because the trees were seen as having no value, peasants began to cut  them down and use them to make charcoal. Enter Jesus Moreno, founder of the local ice cream company, Helados  Bon, who was committed to preserving the ecology of his country.  He  introduced Macadamia Nut ice cream as the founding flavour of a  gourmet line of ice cream, and thereby created a sure market for the  nuts. Ten years later, in 2005, the local production of macadamias exceeded  the market for the ice cream, and Moreno started commercially  packaging the nuts under the brand name of 'La Loma'.  Today, small  cans of the delicate nuts are sold in local fine grocery stores and  tourist shops.  They are billed as 'grown with love in the Dominican  Republic'. But Moreno saw a possibility that this tree could do more for his  country. The macadamia nut tree grows to a height of 15 metres and usually  begins producing nuts when it is six years old.  The first year, a  tree may yield five pounds of nuts, but as it matures, it may produce  40 pounds of nuts a year.  Because its root system is shallow, it can  be planted right beside existing coffee plants, also producing the  needed shade. Moreno thought it could benefit the 10,000 small impoverished coffee  producers, who usually have landholdings of less than one hectare  (2. 43 acres).  The macadamia nut could lift both current and future  generations out of poverty. Edison Santos, manager of the La Loma Project, drives the company  truck up into the rainy hills of Bonao, an hour north of Santo  Domingo.   He talks about the nut trees with the enthusiasm of someone  who has discovered gold. 'We have a business plan now for sustainable agriculture.  We grow the  trees in a nursery until they are two years old and then give them to  the small coffee growers along with all the technical support they  will need,' he told IPS. 'We assure them that we will purchase the nuts from them.  Right now,  we buy the nuts for 2. 70 dollars a pound.  We have to train the  farmers, and help take care of the young trees, since it will be four  years before the trees produce nuts.  But after that, they will  produce for 100 years. 'They do not need much care, simply fertilisation every six months,  and protection from the rats who love to eat the nuts,' he added.   'But the nuts themselves are easy to prepare for market since they  dry by themselves on the tree, and do not have to be cared for like  coffee beans. 'On a small holding of one hectare, a farmer can plant about 200  trees, for an anticipated first harvest price of 2,500 dollars, with  the possibility of a future yield  approaching 21,000 dollars per  year at current prices.  Since the majority of these farmers earn less  than one dollar a day, such numbers may appear a fantasy. But there are farmers who have already seen the results. Servio Martinez has been growing macadamia nut trees for the last 12  years.  He planted 250 trees, but not all at the same time. 'I started growing these trees inside my coffee plantation,' he told  IPS.  'I am very satisfied with this project and so, when anyone asks  me, I say that I am sure of one thing: I have a plantation with a  product that definitely has a secure future.  So I encourage other  farmers to join in the project. 'Martinez sold over 8,000 dollars worth of nuts last year and not all  his trees are as yet yielding fruit. The La Loma project has received international aid money so that the  farmers can be given the trees and technical assistance for nothing.   But Santos explains how they plan to sustain the project. 'We have designed a small box with a plastic tree, which has the  story of our project recorded on it.  We are selecting tourist hotels  in which to put them.  Tourists can then become sponsors for an  individual tree,' he said.  'The hotels will get the nuts shells, which are very hard and  beautiful, for use around their landscapes.  Then, once a farmer's  trees are producing, he will pay back to the project the original  cost of his plants, over the course of five or six years, so that we  can give trees to other farmers. 'The La Loma project can be found on both Facebook and Twitter. 