The fifth World Water Forum (WWF) held in Istanbul ended Sunday with wide- ranging differences among governments and groups with an interest in water. The forum adopted a declaration calling for 'new and adequate resources' for  the water sector.  It also stressed the need for increased vigilance against  corruption, and for preparedness for climate change.  But the final declaration by close to 100 ministers made no mention of the  hotly contested issue whether water is a human right or a commodity to be  traded like oil, gas or gold.  It only described access to safe drinking water and  sanitation as 'a basic human need. 'This led to a counter declaration by delegations from Bolivia, Uruguay, Spain,  Guatemala, Ecuador, Cuba and Chile, drawing support also from Bangladesh,  Benin, Chad, Ethiopia, Honduras, Morocco, Namibia, Niger, Panama,  Venezuela, Sri Lanka, Switzerland and South Africa.  'We recognise that access  to water and sanitation is a human right and we are committed to all  necessary actions for the progressive implementation of this right,' the  dissident statement said.  The European Parliament also supported water as a 'fundamental and  universal right,' according to a statement read by Cristina Gutierrez- Cortinez, Member of the European Parliament from Spain.  About 250  parliamentarians and close to 100 mayors too said they recognised water as a  basic human right.  The dissenting views received support from the president of the UN General  Assembly Miguel D'Escoto Brockmann, who said in a message to the forum  on the eve of its closure that 'water is a public trust, a common heritage of  people and nature, and a fundamental human right.  I am convinced that we  must challenge the notion that water is a commodity to be bought and sold  on the open market. ' Also dividing the forum was the issue who should call such meetings.  So far  it has been the World Water Council (WWC), an international organisation  based in Marseille, France, which is not a part of the United Nations.  The WWC  has some 300 members from 60 countries representing governments and  their agencies, international organisations including some UN agencies, water  professionals, business interests and NGOs.   The council considers itself a 'multi-stakeholder' open to all those interested  in the water sector.  But its legitimacy was questioned by a coalition of labour  and civil society groups from 70 countries at an alternative forum.  The coalition described the WWC as a creation of business interests seeking  to privatise water for profit.  It asked instead that 'polices about water be  decided in an open, transparent and democratic forum rather than a trade  show for the world's largest water corporations. ' The WWC counts 40  business groups among its 300 members. Maude Barlow, advisor to the UN General Assembly president, characterised  WWC members as 'water lords' without a legitimate mandate, and demanded  that future forums be held under the auspices of the UN. Benin, Bolivia, Chile, Cuba, Ecuador, Honduras, Panama, Paraguay and  Venezuela called on 'states to develop a global water forum within the  framework of the United Nations, based on the principles of democracy, full  participation, equity, transparency and social inclusion. 'But business had its say.  Jack Moss of the group Business Action for Water  told the closing session: 'Without water, there is no business.  Without  business, there is no water. 'Despite divergences, both the forum and its opponents agreed on the  severity of the water crisis and that this was likely to deteriorate once climate  change hits water and leads to shortages where water is needed most and  flooding where the need is least.  UN figures show that some 1 billion people lack access to clean drinking  water.  In 2025, roughly 40 percent of the world population will be living in  water-scarce regions.  