In his first address to the board of governors of the  Barbados-based Caribbean Development Bank (CDB), Dr.  Warren  Smith, the new president of the region's premier lending  financial institution, warned of insecurities engulfing  Caribbean economies. He told the governors meeting here last week that the situation has  been worsened by structural weaknesses and extreme vulnerability  linked to Caribbean countries' small size, openness, narrowness of  the production base and proneness to potentially devastating natural  disasters.  'The economic structure has been further undermined and industry  competitiveness challenged by volatile oil prices since the 1970s and  the deeper integration of Caribbean economies into the international  financial and economic systems through globalisation,' he said. Into this mix, Smith adds the Economic Partnership Agreement (EPA)  that was signed in 2008 between the European Union (EU) and the  Caribbean Forum (CARIFORUM) countries, consisting of the 15-member  Caribbean Community (CARICOM) grouping and the  Dominican Republic. He said the EPA signaled the end of unreciprocated preferential  access by Caribbean exports into the EU market, resulting in new  insecurities being created as agriculture production, farm incomes  and employment declined.  Small farmers, especially in banana and  sugar producing countries, have become displaced and poverty levels  rose dramatically, more so in rural communities. 'If you look at countries in the Eastern Caribbean like St.  Lucia,  Dominica, their banana industries have been adversely affected so  that there is, if you will, a first round fallout from that (EPA)  development,' Smith told IPS. He believes that the region should not sit idly by, 'but what we  should do is to recognise that even in the face of those sets backs  what the EPA has done is to open up a whole new world of  opportunities'. He wants the region to focus on being much more innovative while  recognising that accords, such as the EPA, are an irreversible  process in a changing global environment. 'It is Europe tomorrow, it is going to be another region the next day  and so on, so that we have to become accustomed to that reality and  position ourselves to deal with it,' Smith told IPS, adding that as  the 2008 global economic and financial recession unfolded, and the  Caribbean experienced its impact, vulnerability increased.  Jamaica's Finance Minister Audley Shaw said the EPA is 'a sort of  indication of what trading is likely to be in the future' and 'what  this must signal to us is that we have to prepare ourselves for  significantly higher levels of productivity and higher levels of  product differentiation. . .  so that we can benefit from comparative  advantage in the arena of trading with Europe and ultimately in the  arena of global trade. 'He told IPS that most of the measures contained in the EPA are  consistent with the new policies being pursued in Jamaica, where  productivity has been in decline and where economic growth levels -  'marginal at best' - has been at less than one percent for the last  14 years. 'We just have to go and recognise that for EPA to be successful all  of us in terms of our ability to export. . . must understand that we  have to build capacity, build output levels and productivity and  efficiency levels,' he said, adding 'we have signed the agreement  already, the horse kind of gone through the gate already'. Trinidad and Tobago's new economic and planning minister, Dr.   Bhoendradatt Tewarie, has also endorsed the need for more innovation  as a means of enhancing competitiveness leading to improved  productivity. 'A major factor in productivity is the skills and competencies of the  workforce.  Human capital, therefore, is the essence of productivity,  competitiveness, innovation, diversification, the migration of  industries upward in the value chain, entrepreneurship, new business  creation, wealth generation and sustainable development,' he said. Tewarie said that the EPA would be useless to CARICOM countries  'unless we have industries that can take advantage of the EPA to  access the markets of Europe'. 'So what it demands of us is industries that have export capability  on a competitive enough basis to penetrate the market,' he told IPS.  'If you see the EPA as a challenge or a difficulty it will always be  so, but if you see Europe as a market made possible by the EPA then  there are requirements that are necessary to be met in order to  access that market and a lot of this has to do with how you see  things, view the world and how you view your own requirement and  responsibilities in the world. 'The CDB has received a 10 million pound (16. 5-million-dollar) grant  from the British government which it has out into a trust fund that  Smith says operates along the line of 'aid for trade'. 'We use those funds to help Caribbean institutions and Caribbean  companies to position themselves better to be able to access the  European market and we are in discussions with CARIFORUM to get  another round of similar resources to do a similar type of thing,' he  said. Tewarie notes that it has been two years since the signing of the  EPA, and with only eight more years before the region has to allow  for duty-free access of European goods into the Caribbean, it is  necessary for initiatives such as the CARICOM Single Market and  Economy (CSME) to be far advanced. 'What is required of us is really diligent and highly focus  preparation and in that regard the pace of achievement of the CSME  which is really a single economic space needs to be quicken,' he  said, noting 'notwithstanding that there is nothing that prevents a  particular company or a cluster of companies across the region in  cooperation from accessing the European markets'. CARICOM leaders who met in Guyana for a two-day retreat last weekend  noted that the move towards the single economy, first mooted for  2015, would 'longer than anticipated' and 'it may be best to pause  and consolidate the gains of the single market before taking any  further action on certain specific elements' of the initiative. 