The world is facing a 'global epidemic in need of a global  effort', according to a panel of experts on tobacco control,  who met at the United Nations Tuesday to commemorate World No  Tobacco Day. Tobacco control cannot be left to national endeavors, said Haik  Nikogosian, head of the Framework Convention on Tobacco Control.  Rather, what is needed is 'global cooperation' — the best example of  which is the World Health Organization (WHO) Framework Convention on  Tobacco Control, or FCTC, which came into force in 2005. Although the FCTC is the first United Nations treaty on public  health, it is already one of the most widely embraced international  treaties in existence, having been ratified by more than 170  countries to date. The treaty calls on governments to ban tobacco advertising and  promotion, create smoke-free public spaces, put prominent health  warnings on tobacco packaging, combat illicit trade in tobacco  products, and adopt tax and price measures to reduce tobacco  consumption. 'The single most important intervention is tobacco taxes,' said  Prabhat Jha, the University of Toronto's chair in disease control.  He  said a worldwide doubling of tobacco prices would reduce global  consumption by a third. Jha highlighted the success stories of Canada and, especially,  France, where a combination of price hikes and smoking bans halved  smoking within 15 years and saw a dramatic drop in lung cancer rates. 'A modest action could have substantial health gains,' he said. Rather than hurt the poor, Jha believes that tobacco taxation will  benefit them in the long run, as they are more price-responsive and  will likely decrease their tobacco consumption if taxed. 'This is actually a win-win for the poor,' he said.  Joseph Deiss, president of the U. N.  General Assembly, noted that  smoking usually kills people in their economically productive years,  thus adding to poverty as families lose their breadwinners.  And, he added, 'It is the poor who now smoke the most. 'Increased tax revenue would have a particularly significant impact in  the developing world, where tobacco consumption has been steadily  rising. By 2030, 70-80 percent of deaths from tobacco will occur in low- and  middle-income countries, according to Patricia Lambert of the  Framework Convention Alliance.  'Africa fits squarely into that,' she  added. But according to Lambert, the FCTC has a special connection with  Africa.  Only five of the 47 countries in the WHO African region have  not signed the treaty. Representatives from across Africa meet at inter-sessional tobacco  conferences, allowing the entire continent to negotiate with a single  voice on the international stage. 'Often, Africa is seen as somewhere in rear of these kinds of  movements,' Lambert said.  'But when it comes to tobacco control, that  is not true. 'Some countries, however, are encountering legal battles in their  efforts to crack down on tobacco.  'The tobacco industry is not taking this lying down,' Lambert said,  pointing to a lawsuit between British-American Tobacco and the South  African government. This year, tobacco giant Philip Morris sued the government of Uruguay  for having 'excessive' regulations (in Uruguay, health warnings must  cover 80 percent of cigarette packages). But many third world governments must face an additional challenge in  their control efforts: tobacco production is an extremely important  economic industry in some developing countries, which are heavily  dependent on it for foreign revenue. By boosting control measures and reducing tobacco consumption,  governments are putting their own citizens out of work.  '[Farmers] are growing tobacco out of necessity.  They want to pay for  school fees, they want to pay for medications against malaria and  other diseases,' Justin Seruhere, a minister with the Tanzanian  Mission, told IPS. The panel acknowledged that the best solution for these farmers is to  transition to cultivating less harmful products.  Lambert said that it would be decades before a crop shift would  affect farmers, and in that time, ministries of agriculture could  help them make the switch. She added that tobacco production often results in a poverty trap for  individual farmers, who borrow loans and fall deeper and deeper into  debt. Jha pointed to the United States example, where, he said, 'It's not  the case that tobacco farmers are going out of business.  It's that  their sons and daughters aren't staying in the tobacco industry. ''The argument is,' he told IPS, to 'focus on [cutting] demand, and  eventually supply will adjust to it. 'But Seruhere is not satisfied.  'Some of these countries are not so  rich as to be able to change investment from tobacco growth to  production of other crops,' he said. He called for the support of the international community to assist  countries in shifting from harmful to 'useful' production.  'It's possible.  It's doable.  We're going to need commitment, but it's  doable,' he told IPS. 