With deforestation claiming 5. 2 million hectares annually and  governments seemingly incapable of agreeing on a new pact to  curb climate-altering carbon emissions, it would be easy to  write off the situation as hopeless. But one group, based in Costa Rica, decided that instead of waiting  for industry or governments to 'fix' the problem, they would offer a  way for average people around the world to sponsor trees to be grown  and replanted in socially responsible ways. 'Our model is based on seed-collecting networks in communities  supported by people of all ages and nationalities, men and women,'  Jennifer Leigh Smith, the founder and director of Community Carbon  Trees (CCT), told IPS.  'Usually, work producing the trees is  distributed among families in communities where we work. ' Besides helping to sequester carbon dioxide, promote biodiversity and  prevent soil erosion, Smith says these projects enhance local  socioeconomic development.  'CCT works within communities to spread  consciousness about reforestation through hands on, well-paid,  socially responsible labour,' she said. 'Communities become excited about collecting seeds and understand in a  renewed manner how important it is to preserve the remaining forest  for future seeds,' she said.  'We see people learning first hand that  is better to plant the tree and tend it rather than go into the forest  and cut down old growth - which is a common problem in Costa Rica as  poor people are burdened with holding forest reserves even when they  cannot buy shoes for their children. 'With 2011 designated the International Year of Forests, 2012 the  International Year of Cooperatives, and this Jun.  5 World Environment  Day, there is a nexus of renewed momentum behind local sustainable  development initiatives, particularly as they relate to forests and  woodlands. 'The CCT is using the initiative to spread the word out there and help  us to get publicity,' Smith said.  Founded in 2000, the CCT has already planted more than 385,000 trees  in Costa Rica, mostly to reforest farmland.  It participates in  private, community-led or corporate projects.  Sponsoring a tree costs  25 dollars, which covers planting as well as transportation. CCT is also working in partnership with the International Year of  Forests, in an initiative called 'Pacto por la vida' (pact for life),  which promotes its work among international sponsors and local  communities. Smith stressed that besides mitigating climate change, reforestation  helps replenish underground aquifers and prevent landslides in  torrential rains. According to the U. N.  Environment Programme, over 1. 6 billion people  around the world are dependent on forests for their livelihoods. 'Creating alternative income streams is vital to preserving what  rainforest remains as well as planting new stands of mixed native  species for the future,' she noted. Every year since 1972, thousands of people around the world have  celebrated World Environment Day on Jun.  5, in an event created by  UNEP to raise awareness about the numerous challenges humanity was and  still is facing. According to UNEP spokesperson Nick Nuttall, the challenges identified  at the Earth Summit in Rio de Janeiro in 1992 — climate change, water  and forests, among others — continue to be of major concern.  'Every year [World Environment Day] seems to grow bigger and bigger,'  he told IPS, conveying the urgency for governments and citizens to  become more aware and act to protect their natural environment. He said UNEP has also focused on greening international events, such  as the World Football Cup in Germany in 2006 and the one last year in  South Africa.  Achim Steiner, UNEP's executive director, recently went  to Brazil to discuss the conditions for the World Football Cup and the  Olympics to be held respectively in 2014 and 2016.  UNEP's goal is for 'not only a fantastic sporting event, but also an  environmentally friendly event', Nuttall said.  And while these kinds  of one-off events — the World Cup, the Olympics, World Environment Day  — 'are not going to change the world overnight, they are part of a  growing awareness among people and communities and business and  governments,' he concluded. Meanwhile, an international coalition of academics and environmental  activists has launched a global campaign at the United Nations for a  'Universal Declaration of the Rights of Mother Earth'. Maude Barlow, a lead campaigner for the U. N.  convention and  chairperson of the Council of Canadians, a citizen's advocacy  organisation, told IPS the rights of nature are based on the notion  that the natural world is a fully operating system, a community, with  its own laws.  It is therefore necessary for humans to construct laws  that are compatible with the laws of nature. This means promoting human and community development in a way that  protects nature and promotes sustainability, said Barlow, a former  U. N.  Adviser on Water. 'What might it look like if we created laws to give the earth and  other species the right to exist?' she asked.  'If we believe that  rights are inherent, existing by virtue of our creation, then they  belong to all nature, not just to humans. '