As the world continues to marvel at the widespread progress in  modern technology and home electronics, there are still about  2. 5 billion people - out of a global population of nearly 6. 9  billion - who have little or no access to electricity. According to the Paris-based International Energy Agency (IEA), the  future does not hold much hope either - unless there is a dramatic  improvement in current efforts to provide electricity to the world's  'energy poor'. The IEA predicts that 1. 4 billion people will remain short-circuited  with no access to electricity by 2030, when world population is  expected to explode to a staggering 8. 2 billion. And without electricity, say experts, there is no access to the  information superhighway, the Internet. 'Addressing these challenges is beyond the reach of governments,'  warns U. N.  Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon. He says it should involve 'the active engagement of all sectors of  society, including the private sector, local communities, civil  society, international organisations and the world of academia and  research. 'A global initiative for strengthening public-private partnerships  (PPP), launched at the United Nations Thursday, involves several of  the world's electricity companies and U. N.  Energy, an umbrella group  of U. N.  bodies working on sustainable development. These companies, which comprise the Global Sustainable Electricity  Partnership (GSEP), are from the United States, France, Brazil, Italy  Canada, Japan, Russia, Germany, China, Mexico and South Africa. Originally called e8, the GSEP was created following the 1992 Earth  Summit in Brazil primarily 'to promote sustainable energy development  through electricity sector projects and human capacity-building  activities in developing and emerging nations worldwide. 'The GSEP works in close collaboration with key U. N.  agencies and  other international organisations in the energy sector. Kandeh Yumkella, director general of the Vienna-based U. N.  Industrial  Development Organisation (UNIDO) and chair of U. N.  Energy, welcomed  the partnership, which will also serve as an 'important foundation'  for the International Year of Sustainable Energy for All in 2012. The PPP is already visible in Argentina's Patagonia, region where an  86-kilowatt hydroelectric station is expected to provide power to the  tiny rural community of Cochico and to the isolated village of  Chorriaca. The project has been set up in collaboration with Patagonia's  provincial governments and rural communities. According to the secretary-general, the provision of clean, reliable  energy is 'central to efforts to combat climate change and to  achieving the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs), which call for  substantial poverty reduction and improvements in health and  education by 2015. 'Johane Meagher, GSEP's executive director, told IPS providing clean,  reliable sources of electricity to 1. 4 billion by 2030 is a daunting  challenge.  But it is possible with private and public sector  collaboration, he added. 'There is one way only to achieve this goal, though: the private  sector must invest in these projects,' Meagher said.  'So how do  governments attract the private capital needed? The global survey we  conducted with UN-Energy, and case studies such as our partnership's  new projects in Patagonia, point the way forward with a series of  recommendations. 'Mike Morris, chair of GSEP and chief executive officer of American  Electric Power, told IPS that 'by the end of 2011, we will have met  with energy and finance ministers from more than 50 countries and  worked on policy changes they want to make to become more attractive  to investors in electricity projects. '  Strong synergies can result when all advanced power technologies that  emit few or zero greenhouse gases are coupled with enabling public  policies and financing, he added. In addition to improving the lives and environment of people by  supplying them with electricity from advanced coal, renewable,  nuclear, and natural gas technologies, he said, the projects will  also stimulate the growth of local jobs in manufacturing and  services. Meanwhile, in a statement released last week, the International Union  for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) said it strongly supports the  findings of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) as  spelled out in its Special Report on 'Renewable Energy Sources and  Climate Change Mitigation'. 'In 2008, we sourced 13 percent of energy from renewables, but the  IPCC report says that nearly 80 percent of our energy needs,  including rising demand in developing countries, can be met by 2050  through renewable energy sources,' the statement said. The IPCC concludes that in order to get there, governments need to  lead the way and set policies that encourage technology transfer,  awareness raising and financing. 'This report is great news for the planet and people, as well as for  our climate,' says IUCN Director-General Julia Marton-Lefvre. As the energy debate is picking up again in many countries around the  world, IUCN urges governments to build on the findings of the report  and quickly put in place the policies that create a truly green  economy, she said. 'We don’t need to wait for new inventions.  The global shift towards  clean energy can be achieved with the sustainable application of  existing technologies such as bio-energy, solar, wind and  hydropower,' she declared. 