Today one billion people are living in hunger, not because of  scarcity of production or a shortage of food on shelves in the  global marketplace, but because they 'lack the most basic  purchasing power needed to acquire it', Olivier De Schutter,  the United Nations Special Rapporteur on the Right to Food,  said Thursday. Currently, 35-40 percent of harvests are lost due to inadequate  transportation and storage facilities, while a further 35-40 percent  are stored on the supermarket shelves of wealthy Organization for  Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) countries. According to experts like De Schutter, the inability of 10 percent of  the world's population to feed itself is also a reflection of  unsustainable patterns of consumption and deeply flawed models of  industrialised agricultural production which, if allowed to continue,  will divert 50 percent of global cereal harvests towards feeding  cattle by the year 2050. 'From the food crisis in 1974, to the crisis in 2007-2008, and even  now during the food crisis of 2010-2011, governments have had the  same Pavlovian reaction - to increase production in order to lower  prices and alleviate the burden of food price inflation on the  population,' De Schutter said at a panel discussion in Washington. He added that while the reaction was understandable, it has been  undeniably proven to be incomplete, short-sighted and based on an  inadequate diagnosis of the complexity of the problem. 'A food system that is increasingly industrialised and commodified is  not the only one available to us,' he stressed.  'We can and must re- imagine other food systems that take numerous social dimensions into  account. 'Inter-connected CrisesIn his recent report 'Agroecology and the Right to Food', which was  presented to the Human Rights Council in March this year, De Schutter  outlines the global hunger catastrophe as an amalgamation of three  distinct but inherently inter-related problems. These are poverty, caused by trade policies that dump heavily- subsidised produce from developed countries on third world markets,  thus rendering local farmers jobless; environmental degradation  brought on by industrialised farming, which now accounts for nearly  one-third of global green house gas emissions; and an epidemic of  malnutrition caused by the colonising effects of mono-crops and a  flood of processed food from the global north to the global south. Only by examining these three challenges together can a strategy for  ending hunger be successfully designed and implemented, he argues. A study released Friday by the Consultative Group on International  Agricultural Research (CGIAR)'s programme on Climate Change,  Agriculture and Food Security (CCAFS) bolstered this argument by  identifying future climate change 'hotspots' in countries already  crippled by severe food shortages and chronic hunger. By consolidating detailed maps of scores of different agricultural  regions across the world, the seven scientists behind the study  tracked the impacts of climate change on food security and identified  highly-vulnerable populations - principally in Africa and South Asia,  with dark clouds hanging over China and parts of Latin America as  well - that would suffer the double blows of hunger and environmental  crisis. 'When you put these maps together they reveal places around the world  where the arrival of stressful growing conditions could be especially  disastrous,' Polly Ericksen, lead author of the study and a senior  scientist at the CGIAR's International Livestock Research Institute  (ILRI) in Nairobi, Kenya, told the press in Copenhagen Friday.  'These are areas highly exposed to climate shifts, where survival is  strongly linked to the fate of regional crop and livestock yields,  and where chronic food problems indicate that farmers are already  struggling and they lack the capacity to adapt to new weather  patterns,' she said. Swathes of South Asia, including virtually all of India's territory  and vast areas of sub-Saharan Africa are home to 369 million food- insecure people, all of whom live in climate-vulnerable, agriculture- intensive areas. Over 56 million hungry and crop-dependent people in West Africa,  India and China inhabit areas which, in less than 40 years, will  likely experience daily growing season temperatures of 30 degrees  Celsius - virtually impossible conditions for essential crops like  corn and rice. Reimagining food systemsIn 2006, a team of researchers from the University of Essex carried  out a study on 'agro-ecological' approaches to farming and  development. Spanning 57 developing countries and 286 different models of  sustainable farming techniques in an area covering 37 million  hectares - three percent of cultivated land - the study unearthed how  low external-input farming that utilized surrounding ecosystems and  cyclical practices resulted in a 79 percent yield increase, more than  double the average yield under the normalised agricultural system. Agro-ecology, which includes systems that produce their own  fertiliser using materials and waste from the surrounding  environment, is being increasingly viewed as the only viable solution  to the hunger crisis.  Since prices of fertiliser doubled during the  2008 food crisis, continents like Africa that import 95 percent of  their chemical fertilisers could see radically different outcomes in  production by adopting agro-ecological techniques. Analysing the data from the 2006 study by region, the International  Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD) found that in some parts of  Africa the yield increase was a stunning 213 percent.  However, De Schutter warned, this agricultural 'revolution' will not  come about by chance but will require swift and determined government  action. In addition to investing in education, gender-sensitive solutions and  public goods and services such as the infrastructure required to  nurture farmers' unions and peasant cooperatives, De Schutter's  recommendations to governments include an urgent appeal to  revolutionize markets to reward best-practices rather than short-term  profit. 'The market as it exists today is too focused on global supply chains  and does not give enough importance to local farmers, and producers  of diversified crops,' De Schutter told IPS. 'Governments must move away from export-led supply models and  reinvest heavily in regional, sustainable food systems. 'He added that governments should set solid agendas, which development  agencies and private sector actors would align with, that incorporate  a cultural shift away from a broken structure and towards a  visionary, resilient food future. 