Samuel Weekes remembers when the hills stretching out beyond the heart of  Freetown were green. 'Fifteen, 20 years ago, those hills were covered in trees.  Today, most those trees have been cut down,  mostly for housing purposes,' says Weekes, the director of population studies at Fourah Bay College in  Sierra Leone's capital city. Freetown is wedged between the Atlantic Ocean and steep hills leading inland.  On the hills around the  city, homes cling to steep slopes, some held together by 'packings' - as the locals refer to the  makeshift terracing.  There are no roads  here, only steep paths held together with stones.  In some  areas, residents have to literally scramble up to the next level of terrace. In a community near the university, two infants were killed when a boulder came loose from the slope  above and crashed through their house last year.  But resident Ibrahim Conteh says they don't know of  any building codes they should follow to erect their homes safely.  'Heavy rain can come and just pass through the house and cause accidents to happen,' he says,  standing near a three-metre drop to the roof of a house below.  'We try our best to make sure we put in  place things to try make sure no bad things happen. ''People find it difficult to find a place to live, so they come here. 'When they want to build, says Thaimu Turay, they clear off the trees, break the stone and make  packings.  'No one tells us how or where to put our structures,' he says.  Weekes says government needs  to plan carefully and enforce existing regulations limiting the amount of building that can happen on  hillsides. 'How much of that is being done, I don’t know,' he says.   'Government has to be very proactive to set  limits beyond which they should not go and those limits have to be closely monitored. 'Yet as the city's population balloons to well over a million people - exact figures are not known - space  is becoming ever harder to find.  More and more people are clearing to make way for homes - some  grand mansions, others no more than a few sheets of tin pieced together - raising fears of landslides  and other calamities as development spreads unchecked up the mountainsides.  Those fears are fresh  on people's minds now as the rainy season's daily deluges begin. Weekes attributes the burgeoning crisis to unbridled population growth and rural-urban migration, as  thousands flock to the city in hopes of better opportunities.  Part of that is due to what Weekes calls  'skewed development. ''There's a vast difference between Freetown and other urban and rural areas,' says Weekes, sitting in  his office at West Africa's oldest Western-style university.  'If you can improve development in other  urban areas and in rural areas, you might be able to relieve some of the stress on Freetown. 'Dr Kolleh Bangura, the director of Sierra Leone’s Environment Protection Agency, says the growing  population is forcing people to build on the hills, with little regard to building regulations. There are zones where construction is banned, but 'there is no respect for these green belt areas,' says  Bangura. He says it’s difficult to control the building, despite the dangers it poses, citing the 'politicisation' of  the issue and the brutal murder several years ago of a lands official who went to demolish illegal  structures on a hillside. The government puts little pressure on those carving up the hills now, says Bangura, who warns laws  must be revisited and resources expanded to deal with the growing population. Experts warn that if growth continues at its current rate, 'serious problems' will beset this city, not just  with loss of forest cover, but sanitation, water and electricity supply and other infrastructure, which is  already hugely lacking. Freetown is far from alone when it comes to the scramble to find space for ever-burgeoning  populations on inhospitable terrain.  From Pakistan to the United States to the Philippines, people are  settling on steep ground, with sometimes devastating consequences. Weekes attributes the burgeoning crisis to unbridled population growth and rural-urban migration, as  thousands flock to the city in hopes of better opportunities.  Part of that is due to what he calls 'skewed  development. ''There's a vast difference between Freetown and other urban and rural areas,' says Weekes, sitting in  his office at West Africa's oldest Western-style university.  'If you can improve development in other  urban areas and in rural areas, you might be able to relieve some of the stress on Freetown. 'Cyril Mattia, spokesperson for Freetown City Council, says Sierra Leone's civil war, which ended in 2002,  brought many people to the city.  Some never left.  The growing population, he says, is 'destroying the  very fabric of the municipality. 'Mattia says many of the structures carved out of the hillsides are not authorised. He says the bulk of responsibility for planning and enforcement of the city lies with the national  government, but the municipality works on 'sensitisation' to encourage people to avoid unsafe areas. 'Most of the land has been encroached upon and they are very hard to remove because of political  reasons,' says Mattia.  'We have huge rainfall in this country and people are also playing with the soil. 'Eventually disaster will occur. '  