Last week, the world received a warning.  A disturbing report  from the International Energy Agency, the respected  international authority on energy policy, found that Co2  emissions in 2010 were the highest ever recorded. The IEA concluded that if the world is to keep global warming to two  degrees above pre-industrial levels, we've got very little time to  act.  Two degrees has long been an important threshold in the minds of  climate scientists and policy-makers.  Beyond this, the impacts of  climate change could become catastrophic. Against this background, the U. N.  climate change talks starting on  Monday in Bonn, Germany, take on a new urgency.  The U. N.  Framework  Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) process allows every  country to  play a role in confronting the challenge.  But, as so often in  international negotiations, the voices of richer and more  industrialised states threaten to drown out those of the least  developed countries (LDCs).  Delegates in Bonn will discuss issues of major importance to LDCs.   The meetings are a crucial milestone on the road to the UNFCCC's  Conference of the Parties in Durban, South Africa in December.  By  then, developing countries hope for agreement on an ambitious,  legally binding global deal to replace the Kyoto Protocol (the  Protocol expires next year). The likelihood of reaching such an agreement by December is already  in the balance.  For a credible and truly ambitious deal to be  reached, it is vital that LDCs' voices are given an adequate hearing  now. On the negotiating table in Bonn are a range of issues around  mitigation (how to reduce carbon emissions); adaptation (how to deal  with the effects of a more volatile climate) and climate financing  (how to pay for measures to tackle climate change). This last issue is particularly poignant for LDCs.  Most are already  experiencing documented impacts from manmade climate change, from  sea-level rise in small island states such as Tuvalu, to  extraordinary floods in Bangladesh, to extended droughts in the horn  of Africa.  Generous funding is urgently needed to manage disasters  that aren't not of such countries' own making — and to set nations on  greener, more resilient development paths.  In Bonn, members of a Transitional Committee will meet to hammer out  progress towards creating a Green Climate Fund, one of the  big  commitments from last year's U. N.  climate talks.  This Fund is  intended to help developing countries shift to more climate  compatible development.  Achieving this will require resources from  the Fund sooner rather than later. It is also expected that the Bonn meetings will produce a committee  to improve coordination and delivery of climate change financing.  If  achieved, this will be a big step in making donor aid more effective.  Parties to the talks will discuss the establishment of an Adaptation  Committee to conduct vulnerability assessments and an agreement from  developing countries to improve the way they measure emissions  reductions.  They will work toward establishing a Technology Mechanism  to accelerate technology transfers between the rich world and  developing countries, and aim to finesse plans for reducing emissions  from deforestation. For a number of reasons, the least developed countries risk missing  out on the potential benefits of a global deal. First, LDCs have to rely on broad coalitions such as the Group of 77  to cover all the issues covered by the talks.  This means that a  diverse group of countries often has to find a common denominator  when negotiating vital policy.  Consensus-building may overlook the  needs of individual nations. Second, to stand a chance of getting their voices heard, LDCs need to  assess complex scientific studies and reports.  On many occasions,  these studies originate from industrial economies or international  think tanks and other non-developing country sources.  Developing  economies can find it hard to obtain alternative, more relevant,  views. Third, with the growing legal dimension to the talks, there's a wide  disparity between access to legal resources.  LDCs struggle to  mobilise legal expertise at the necessary speed to influence and  direct proceedings.  And lastly, the proliferation of meetings makes  it difficult for least developed countries to maintain continuity and  consistency in their negotiating strategies. The risk is that crucial stakeholders end up with limited  participation in the talks.  Those countries that suffer the most from  climate change are unlikely to get the help they need because their  positions are not articulated clearly enough.  Multilateral  negotiations should be more inclusive; instead they're a convoluted  process.  Delegates need strong communication, persuasion and other  interpersonal skills to have real influence.  Success, then, requires strong capacity in all these areas, but this  is exactly what many LDCs lack.  To help counteract these structural  disadvantages, CDKN will work to help LDCs interpret the  language and  mechanics of the negotiations. The best outcomes will result from combining this short-term support  with longer-term capacity-building for decision-makers.  This will  include efforts at the national level.  CDKN is supporting countries  to invest sufficient funds in research, explore policy options, and  strengthen government and civil society institutions to influence the  climate talks. Why should industrialised countries be concerned about LDCs'  performance in the talks? If a climate deal is agreed that's  inconsistent with the needs of developing economies, everyone will  lose out.  Weak LDC capacity could mean an international framework  that fails to account for the impacts of climate change on the  poorest people, with significant consequences for global economic  growth, migration patterns, and resource depletion. LDCs will not achieve the negotiating might of the G20 countries  overnight, and they alone cannot force a meaningful climate deal in  2011.  However, giving LDCs the support and the space to intervene  effectively in the climate talks is the right thing to do.  It  increases the chances of a global deal and international financial  framework that will protect the world's most vulnerable people, and  will help protect us all.  *Sam Bickersteth is the Chief Executive of the Climate and  Development Knowledge Network (CDKN).  Ali Tauqeer Sheikh is the  Regional Director for Asia.  CDKN is a five-year project to assist  developing country decision-makers to design and deliver climate  compatible development.  www. cdkn. org