As global carbon emissions hit record-high levels last year,  officials from leading Asian nations told the 2011  International Transport Forum in nearby Leipzig that their  citizens want more cars. At the same meeting, some Europeans  urged a 21st century renaissance  in bicycle transport, with electric and electric-assist bikes for  personal health and the health of the climate. 'We in India need to provide more roads and rail,' said B. K.   Chaturvedi, a member of India's Planning Commission. 'Cycling is a miniscule thing.  That's not the future,' Chaturvedi  told the nearly 800 attendees. 'The bike is better to get around in Beijing, but bicycle use is  dropping fast due to poor air quality and the danger from car  traffic,' said Pan Haixiao, a professor at Tongji University in  China. The number of cars and light trucks globally is projected to triple  from the current 850 million to 2. 5 billion by 2050, according to the  International Transport Forum's (ITF) Transport Outlook 2011.  That  growth is projected to be almost entirely in the developing world. Richer countries are actually reducing the personal vehicle use in  the last few years. The Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development's ITF is an  intergovernmental organisation for the transport sector involving 52  different nations. Transport is the second leading source of carbon dioxide emissions,  contributing about 7. 5 gigatonnes to the 30. 6 gigatonnes (Gt) emitted  in total in 2010.  The International Energy Agency (IEA) reported last  week that humanity cannot exceed annual emissions of 32. 0 Gt or  it  will be impossible to achieve the internationally-agreed target of  below two degrees C of global warming to avoid very dangerous levels  of global warming. IEA acknowledges that 32. 0 Gt could be reached by the end of this  year. Even with significant improvements in fuel efficiency and wider use  of electric vehicles, the ITF report projects that carbon emissions  from the transport sector will likely grow 250 percent by 2050.  That  would amount to roughly 19 Gt annually from transport alone. Scientists warn that to have a 50-50 chance of staying below two  degrees C, carbon emission growth must flatline by 2015 at the latest  and start to decline by three percent per year.  Carbon dioxide stays  in the atmosphere for a long time - emissions from the 19th century  are still contributing their small share to current and future  warming. Scientists also caution that there are feedbacks in the climate  system, such as the potential for large releases of carbon from  melting permafrost, that have not been included in their estimations. Bicycles, and particularly electric-assist bikes, offer an important,  practical solution for mobility and significant carbon emissions  reductions, Manfred Neun, president of European Cyclists' Federation,  told the conference. The advent of lithium batteries with improved capacity-to-weight  ratios now means electric bikes or e-bikes are ideal for trips up to  15 km at speeds of 25 km/hour, Neun said.  The Dutch Cyclists'  Federation reported that if all car journeys up to 7. 5 km would be  replaced by cycling trips, carbon emissions would decrease by 2. 4  million tonnes per year in the Netherlands. Even in Europe, with its very good public transit system, about half  of all car trips are six km or shorter. To change this, the European Cyclists' Federation sponsored the  'Charter of Seville' last March in Spain.   Representatives from 47  countries called on all ministers of transport to recognise the  benefits of cycling, to promote cycling at the international level,  and to invest substantially in cycling in their own countries. Neun was critical of Germany's recent announcement to invest two  billion euros to put one million electric cars on the road by 2020.   Germany already has one million electric vehicles in the form of e- bikes but they do not receive anything like this support, he said.   Lack of infrastructure such as separated bike lanes keeps bikes from  wider use. To increase bike use, South Korea is planning bicycle highways -  clear plexiglass tubes elevated above highways where commuters could  easily ride 20 km into work protected from rain or wind, said Kee  Yeon Hwang, president of the Korea Transport Institute. 'Protected bikeways ought to be a right.  It would increase the social  status of bike riders,' said Enrique Peñalosa, a former mayor of  Bogota, Colombia. Peñalosa started Bogota's famous car-free Sundays where no cars were  allowed in the entire city of eight million. 'We have over 500 kilometres of bikeways - some 60 kilometres that  are for bikes and pedestrians only,' said Peñalosa. However, there is enormous pressure from car owners and the  construction industry to build more roads even though cars already  use more space than all other modes of transport combined, he said. There is another reason most governments do not take bicycle  transport more seriously.  States are dependent on major revenue  streams from taxes on fuels, pointed out Tim Leunig of the London  School of Economics. 'That is why governments are often eager to build new roads because  that means more miles driven and more fuel tax revenue,' Leunig said. To make the shift to other modes of transport, the tax system will  have to change, he said. 