Heavy rainfall means that over 500,000 people living in mountainous areas in  Uganda need to be relocated as they live in areas at risk to landslides. In 2010 over 300 people died on the slopes of Mount Elgon, eastern Uganda after days of heavy rains  led to landslides on the mountain.  Thousands more were displaced.  This week the Uganda Red Cross  Society warned that more landslides are looming in the Elgon area, placing thousands more at risk and  in need of relocation.  The displacement of people due to climate-related disasters has not been just a local issue.  Tens of  millions of people around the world have been displaced by climate-related disasters over the last two  years.  The challenge to come up with a new guiding framework on how to protect millions facing  environmental disasters has been the subject of discussion among international agencies at the Nansen  Conference on Climate Change and Displacement in the 21st Century, which ran from June 6 to 7 in  Oslo.  It is the first global event to bring together environmental and migration specialists to explore the  displacement dimension of climate change.  The United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees António Guterres said there is a need to find new  measures of protecting those displaced within and across borders. This comes after a report titled ‘Displacement due to natural hazard-induced disasters’, released on  June 6 by the Internal Displacement Monitoring Center, found that more than 42 million people were  displaced in 2010 and 90 percent of these were victims of climate-related disasters.  Of the 42 million  plus, four percent of the displacement happened in Africa and 77 percent in Asia.  Guterres said that while much of the displacement is largely internal and required governments to carry  out their primary responsibility, he warned that increasing numbers of people will be displaced across  borders and may be unable to return home.  Those displaced by climate-induced disasters across borders lack protection because they do not  qualify for refugee status under the terms of the 1951 Refugee Convention.  To address this, Guterres  proposed the development of a global guiding framework.  He said such a framework should contain  arrangements for 'temporary or interim protection for people who flee natural disasters. ' He also  suggested that relevant existing treaties could be invoked to address the problem. Guterres urged the international community to switch from the emergency-mode response to natural  disasters if they are to help countries adapt to climate changes.  'Traditionally the international community has responded to disasters and displacement in emergency  mode, establishing camps, distributing food and water, building schools and clinics, the billions of  dollars spent on relief in recent decades have evidently not led to the sustainable strengthening of  national and local capacities,' he said.  'National adaptation plans should take full account of the linkage  between climate change and human mobility. 'He explained that the UNHCR has refused to embrace the new terminology of climate refugees or  environmental refugees fearing this will complicate and confuse the protection of victims of persecution  and armed conflicts under the 1951 Refugees Convention. He warned that reaching a new international instrument that could protect many displaced by  environmental factors could lead to hostility towards migration from host countries as it would increase  their responsibility.   'In the current context it will not be easy to establish a binding new international instrument relating to  rights of such people.  Xenophobia is already widespread, fuelled in many instances by populist  politicians,' he said.  Kenya’s commissioner for Refugee Affairs Peter Kusimba said the country needed to address climate- driven migration, which has affected northern Kenya. Northern Kenya has been host to Somali refugees for the last 20 years and Kusimba says that the  communities in that area need a lot of support to adapt to the demographic changes and its impact on  the environment. 'We have a ministry for northern Kenya and we are addressing the environmental issues.  The local  population have knowledge of environmentals and seasonal changes.  We need to enhance this and  support them to survive the increasingly harsh droughts,' he said. Kelly David, the head of the U. N.  Office for Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs for Southern and  Eastern Africa said lack of data made it difficult for governments to respond to climate-induced  migration. 'There’s lack of data of the movement of people in the region who are pushed by climate changes and  this is in part due to conflicts.  Most refugees from the horn of Africa are simply taken into neighbouring  countries because of the war,' said David, 'this lack of data makes regional governments not respond  effectively to climate-ridden migration. 'David said that many people were increasingly migrating from east Africa and the horn of Africa to  southern Africa due to prolonged droughts.  David indicated that southern African governments have  tightened their border controls, which is not a solution as people look for alternative routes to get in. 'We have seen build up in northern Mozambique of Ethiopians and Somalis who travel down the coast  by boat and then walk inland,' she said. The Cancun adaptation framework achieved at the 2010 United Nations Framework Convention on  Climate Change (UNFCC) recognised the increasing challenge of climate-induced migrations both  internally and across borders.  The adaption framework called on parties to 'enhance action on  adaptation taking… measures to enhance understanding coordination and cooperation with regard to  climate induced displacement, migration and planned relocation where appropriate at national, regional  and international levels. 'However, the framework lacks the specifics on how the displaced will be protected. 