Land is life.  It is the basis of livelihoods for peasants and  indigenous people across the Third World and is also becoming  the most vital asset in the global economy. As the resource demands of globalisation increase, land has emerged  as a key source of conflict.  In India, 65 percent of people are  dependent on land. At the same time a global economy, driven by speculative finance and  limitless consumerism, wants the land for mining and for industry,  for towns, highways, and biofuel plantations.  The speculative economy  of global finance is hundreds of times larger than the value of real  goods and services produced in the world. Financial capital is hungry for investments and returns on  investments.  It must commodify everything on the planet - land and  water, plants and genes, microbes and mammals.  The commodification of  land is fuelling the corporate land grab in India, both through the  creation of Special Economic Zones and through foreign direct  investment in real estate. Land, for most people in the world, is Terra Madre, Mother Earth,  Bhoomi, Dharti Ma.  The land is people's identity; it is the ground of  culture and economy.  The bond with the land is a bond with Bhoomi,  our Earth; 75 percent of the people in the Third World live on the  land and are supported by the land.  The Earth is the biggest employer  on the planet: 75 percent of the wealth of the people of the global  south is in land. Colonisation was based on the violent takeover of land.  And now,  globalisation as recolonisation is leading to a massive land grab in  India, in Africa, in Latin America.  Land is being grabbed for  speculative investment, for speculative urban sprawl, for mines and  factories, for highways and expressways.  Land is being grabbed from  farmers after trapping them in debt and pushing them to suicide. India's land issuesIn India, the land grab is facilitated by the toxic mixture of the  colonial Land Acquisition Act of 1894, the deregulation of  investments and commerce through neo-liberal policies -  and with it  the emergence of the rule of uncontrolled greed and exploitation.  It  is facilitated by the creation of a police state and the use of  colonial sedition laws which define defence of the public interest  and national interest as anti-national. The World Bank has worked for many years to commodify land.  The 1991  World Bank structural adjustment programme reversed land reform,  deregulated mining, roads and ports.  While the laws of independent  India to keep land in the hands of the tiller were reversed, the 1894  Land Acquisition Act was untouched. Thus the state could forcibly acquire the land from the peasants and  tribal peoples and hand it over to private speculators, real estate  corporations, mining companies and industry. Across the length and breadth of India, from Bhatta in Uttar Pradesh  (UP) to Jagatsinghpur in Orissa to Jaitapur in Maharashtra, the  government has declared war on our farmers, our annadatas, in order  to grab their fertile farmland. Their instrument is the colonial Land Acquisition Act - used by  foreign rulers against Indian citizens.  The government is behaving as  the foreign rulers did when the Act was first enforced in 1894,  appropriating land through violence for the profit of corporations -  JayPee Infratech in Uttar Pradesh for the Yamuna expressway, POSCO in  Orissa and AREVA in Jaitapur - grabbing land for private profit and  not, by any stretch of the imagination, for any public purpose.  This  is rampant in the country today. These land wars have serious consequences for our nation's democracy,  our peace and our ecology, our food security and rural livelihoods.   The land wars must stop if India is to survive ecologically and  democratically. While the Orissa government prepares to take the land of people in  Jagatsinghpur, people who have been involved in a democratic struggle  against land acquisition since 2005, Rahul Gandhi makes it known that  he stands against forceful land acquisition in a similar case in  Bhatta in Uttar Pradesh. The Minister for the Environment, Mr Jairam Ramesh, admitted that he  gave the green signal to pass the POSCO project - reportedly under  great pressure.  One may ask: 'Pressure from whom?' This visible  double standard when it comes to the question of land in the country  must stop. Violation of the landIn Bhatta Parsual, Greater Noida (UP), about 6,000 acres of land is  being acquired by infrastructure company Jaiprakash Associates to  build luxury townships and sports facilities - including a Formula 1  racetrack - in the guise of building the Yamuna Expressway.  In total,  the land of 1,225 villages is to be acquired for the 165 km  Expressway. The farmers have been protesting this unjust land acquisition, and  last week, four people died - while many were injured during a clash  between protesters and the police on May 7, 2011.  If the government  continues its land wars in the heart of India's bread basket, there  will be no chance for peace. In any case, money cannot compensate for the alienation of land.  As  80-year-old Parshuram, who lost his land to the Yamuna Expressway,  said: 'You will never understand how it feels to become landless. 'While land has been taken from farmers at Rs 300 (six dollars) per  square metre by the government - using the Land Acquisition Act - it  is sold by developers at Rs 600,000 (13,450 dollars) per square metre  - a 200,000 percent increase in price - and hence profits.  This land  grab and the profits contribute to poverty, dispossession and  conflict. Similarly, on Apr.  18, in Jaitapur, Maharashtra, police opened fire  on peaceful protesters demonstrating against the Nuclear Power Park  proposed for a village adjacent to the small port town.  One person  died and at least eight were seriously injured.  The Jaitapur nuclear  plant will be the biggest in the world and is being built by French  company AREVA.  After the Fukushima disaster, the protest has  intensified - as has the government's stubbornness. Today, a similar situation is brewing in Jagatsinghpur, Orissa, where  20 battalions have been deployed to assist in the anti-constitutional  land acquisition to protect the stake of India's largest foreign  direct investment - the POSCO Steel project.  The government has set  the target of destroying 40 betel farms a day to facilitate the land  grab.  The betel brings the farmers an annual earning of Rs 400,000  (9,000 dollars) an acre. The Anti-POSCO movement, in its five years of peaceful protest, has  faced state violence numerous time and is now gearing up for another  - perhaps final - non-violent and democratic resistance against a  state using violence to facilitate its undemocratic land grab for  corporate profits, overlooking due process and the constitutional  rights of the people. The largest democracy of the world is destroying its democratic  fabric through its land wars.  While the constitution recognises the  rights of the people and the panchayats [village councils] to  democratically decide the issues of land and development, the  government is disregarding these democratic decisions - as is evident  from the POSCO project where three panchayats have refused to give up  their land. The use of violence and destruction of livelihoods that the current  trend is reflecting is not only dangerous for the future of Indian  democracy, but for the survival of the Indian nation state itself.   Considering that today India may claim to be a growing or booming  economy but yet is unable feed more than 40 percent of its children  is a matter of national shame. Land is not about building concrete jungles as proof of growth and  development; it is the progenitor of food and water, a basic for  human survival.  It is thus clear: what India needs today is not a  land grab policy through an amended colonial land acquisition act but  a land conservation policy, which conserves our vital eco-systems,  such as the fertile Gangetic plain and coastal regions, for their  ecological functions and contribution to food security. Handing over fertile land to private corporations, who are becoming  the new zamindars [heriditary aristocrats], cannot be defined as  having a public purpose.  Creating multiple privatised super highways  and expressways does not qualify as necessary infrastructure.  The  real infrastructure India needs is the ecological infrastructure for  food security and water security.  Burying our fertile food-producing  soils under concrete and factories is burying the country's future. *Dr.  Vandana Shiva is a physicist, ecofeminist, philosopher,  activist, and author of more than 20 books and 500 papers.  She is the  founder of the Research Foundation for Science, Technology and  Ecology, and has campaigned for biodiversity, conservation and  farmers' rights, winning the Right Livelihood Award [Alternative  Nobel Prize] in 1993. Published under an agreement with Al-Jazeera. The views expressed in this article are the author's own and do not  necessarily represent the editorial policy of Al Jazeera. 