With only three weeks left before U. S.  military forces are  scheduled to begin withdrawing from Afghanistan, the debate  over the size and pace of that withdrawal has become  increasingly intense. On one hand, the Pentagon, backed by prominent neo-conservatives and  other hawks, insists that the 18-month-old 'surge' of 30,000 U. S.   troops has turned the strategic tide against the Taliban.  Anything more than a 'modest' drawdown of a few thousand of the  nearly 100,000 soldiers and marines there through the end of the  year, they argue, risks losing all that has been gained. 'I would hope that (the withdrawal) is very small,' the 2008  Republican presidential candidate, Sen.  John McCain, told the  Financial Times this week.  'I would hope that it is 3,000.  We need  another fighting season (against the Taliban). 'On the other hand, President Barack Obama's political advisers,  backed by a strong majority of Democrats and a small but growing  minority of Republicans in Congress, are arguing for a much more  substantial withdrawal.  In the clearest marker so far, the influential chairman of the Senate  Armed Services Committee, Carl Levin, said this week that at least  15,000 troops should be withdrawn between July and the end of the  year.  His appeal came just days after the ranking Democrat on the House  subcommittee that oversees the Pentagon's budget, Rep.  Norm Dicks,  shocked Washington by calling for an end to the U. S.  military  presence in Afghanistan before 2014.  Current plans call for the U. S.   and its NATO allies, which have sent more than 40,000 troops, to  withdraw all their combat forces by the end of that year. 'We need to start seeing if we can do this (withdrawal) a little  faster,' Dicks, a veteran Democratic hawk, told Politico. 'I think the American people would overwhelmingly like to see this  brought to a conclusion sooner than 2014,' he said, citing growing  'war fatigue' in Congress. Obama, who has promised that the initial withdrawal will be  'significant', has otherwise kept his cards close to his chest.  The  White House said he was still waiting to receive formal  recommendations from the outgoing defence secretary, Robert Gates,  who met with military commanders during a three-day farewell visit of  Afghanistan that began on the weekend. The withdrawal debate has intensified steadily since the May 2  killing by U. S.  Special Forces of Al-Qaeda chief Osama bin Laden at a  compound in the Pakistani resort town of Abbottabad where he had  apparently been living for six years.  Until then, it appeared that  the Pentagon and its civilian allies would prevail upon Obama to  withdraw only a 'modest' — if not token — number of troops in July  and through the end of the year. But bin Laden's demise gave new momentum to the war's critics who  have long argued that Al-Qaeda had, for all practical purposes, left  Afghanistan in 2001 and that Washington's military-led  counterinsurgency (COIN) strategy there was overly ambitious and  largely ineffective, if not counter-productive.  'We've gone from being waist- to chest-deep in quicksand,' noted  Matthew Hoh, who directs the Afghanistan Study Group and served in  Afghanistan as both a Marine captain and a State Department adviser. At the same time, the growing focus in Congress about the yawning  government deficit has cast a harsher light on the war's enormous  cost — some 10 billion dollars a month, not including another 300  million dollars a month for civilian-led aid projects. It was these considerations, as well as unhappiness with U. S.   military operations in Libya, that led late last month to near- passage by the House of Representatives of an amendment to the 690- billion-dollar 2011 defence authorisation bill that required Obama to  submit a plan for withdrawing U. S.  troops and 'an accelerated  transition' of U. S.  operations there to the Afghan government.  The amendment, which was defeated 204-215, gained the votes of all  but eight Democrats and 26 Republicans — a total of nearly 42 more  votes than a similar measure last year. The vote, which was taken as a strong indication of war weariness,  appears to have tilted the balance in the debate, as the Pentagon and  its backers stepped up their public campaign for a 'modest'  withdrawal of just a few thousand troops beginning in July. Thus, a Washington Post/ABC poll released earlier this week that  showed a sharp increase - from 31 percent last March to 43 percent  after bin Laden's death - in the percentage of people who believe  that the war in Afghanistan has been worth the costs was seized on by  one former Bush administration adviser as evidence that Obama  'probably has the political breathing room' to choose a 'measured  withdrawal' as opposed to a 'rapid retreat'. The same survey, however, showed found that three out of four  respondents favoured withdrawing 'a substantial number of U. S.  combat  forces from Afghanistan this summer'. At the same time, Kimberly and Frederick Kagan, neo-conservative  military analysts close to the outgoing U. S.  commander in  Afghanistan, Gen.  David Petraeus, published an op-ed in the Wall  Street Journal arguing that 'nothing about conditions on the ground  justifies the withdrawal of any U. S.  or coalition forces'. Moreover, they warned, if Obama withdraws all 30,000 'surge' forces  by the end of 2012, 'the war will likely be lost. 'Gates, who has called for a 'modest' drawdown, has not offered a  specific number, but, since the House vote, in particular, he has  made clear that he wants as few combat troops as possible to leave.  'I think we shouldn't let up on the gas too much, at least for the  next few months,' he said over the weekend.   He has also hinted that  he will speak out publicly in support of the current strategy after  he steps down at the end of the month. Whether this will be enough to sway Obama, who has been criticised by  his fellow-Democrats for deferring too much to the military, remains  to be seen.  But it is clear that disillusionment with the war is spreading in  both parties.  Releasing a highly critical staff report on the effectiveness and  sustainability of U. S.  aid programmes in Afghanistan Wednesday,  Senate Foreign Relations Committee Chairman John Kerry expressed  strong doubts about the current strategy.  'While the United States has genuine national security interests in  Afghanistan,' said Kerry, a key foreign policy ally of the White  House, 'our current commitment, in troops and dollars, is neither  proportional to our interests nor sustainable. 'His remarks were seconded by the Committee's ranking Republican, Sen.   Richard Lugar.  'Despite 10 years of investment and attempts to better  understand the culture and the region's actors, we remain in a cycle  that produces relative progress but fails to deliver a secure  political or military resolution,' he said. 'Undoubtedly, we will make some progress when we are spending more  than 100 billion dollars per year in that country.  The more important  question is whether we have an efficient strategy for protecting our  vital interests that does not involve massive open-ended expenditures  and does not require us to have more faith than is justified in  Afghan institutions,' he said. *Jim Lobe's blog on U. S.  foreign policy can be read at  http://www. lobelog. com. 