The likelihood of a U. S.  or Israeli military attack on Iran's  nuclear installations seems miniscule during the remaining  months of the Barack Obama administration's first term. The U. S.  is focused on domestic economic problems, winding down wars  in Iraq, Afghanistan and Libya, and stabilising emerging democracies  in Egypt and Tunisia.  Israel is preoccupied with Arab uprisings and  new manifestations of people power by Palestinians in and outside the  West Bank and Gaza. Yet war cannot be ruled out, according to regional specialists who  say that the persistent invocation of the 'military option' by some  Israelis and U. S.  officials may be inhibiting diplomatic initiatives. Retired Adm.  William 'Fox' Fallon, who resigned as head of U. S.   Central Command in 2008 after a profile in Esquire magazine portrayed  him as opposing a military strike on Iran, told a Washington audience  Tuesday that while there seemed to be 'little chance' of a preventive  strike, 'I have no idea' whether one could occur. 'The problem was and still is… this incessant focus on conflict,  conflict, conflict,' he told a symposium of the American Iranian  Council, a group that advocates engagement with Iran.  'We ought to be  working pretty hard to focus on other things that would put us in a  different place' with Iran, he said. One spark for conflict could be a shooting incident in the narrow  waters off Iran in the Persian Gulf.  Fallon said that during the many years he spent stationed in the  region as a Navy flyer and commander, U. S.  interactions with the  regular Iranian Navy were 'in my experience, very professional… The  problem for us lately is that the IRGC (Iran's Revolutionary Guard  Corps) has muscled in … more frequently than ever … and they don't  behave in the expected ways.  They've been challenging in some  respects. ''On several occasions while I was the commander we had some shooting  out there that was absolutely unnecessary,' Fallon added.  'This kind  of potential is not good. 'Fallon and his predecessor, Army Gen.  John Abizaid, sought but were  apparently denied permission from the George W.  Bush administration  to negotiate an 'incidents at sea' agreement with Iran that would  have established procedures for preventing altercations from turning  into a major conflict. 'Gen.  Abizaid had some very good ideas but they weren't accepted by  the Bush administration,' said Col.  David Crist, a special adviser to  the current head of Centcom, Marine Gen.  James Mattis, and the author  of an upcoming book on the history of U. S.  military clashes with  Iran. Speaking Tuesday at the same Washington symposium as Fallon, Crist  said that 'there is always the potential for an unintended  consequence in the Gulf. ' He noted a lack of understanding in both  countries of how national security decisions are made and examples of  'Tom Cruise fly-bys' of Iranian aircraft close to U. S.  ships. 'Is this part of an Iranian plan to systematically harass the United  States or just [the actions of] hot shot pilots?' Crist asked.  The  U. S.  and Iran are in a 'regional cold war but the means to de- escalate are not in place. 'Some hardliners in Iran might actually welcome conflict with the  United States or Israel to unify a politically divided nation. At the same time, Iran is continuing its provocative nuclear  progress.  On Tuesday, Iranian vice president and atomic energy chief  Fereydoun Abbasi announced that Iran would install advanced  centrifuges to produce uranium enriched to 19. 75 percent at Fordow,  an installation outside the theological centre of Qom that is built  into a mountainside and was revealed by the United States in  September 2009.  Abbasi also said Iran intended to triple its output  of 19. 75 percent enriched uranium by the end of this year. While the uranium is ostensibly meant to be fuel for a Tehran reactor  that produces medical isotopes, the Institute for Science and  International Security, a Washington research group that focuses on  nuclear proliferation, warned that such a step would enable Iran 'to  more quickly break out and produce enough weapon-grade uranium for a  nuclear weapon, if it chose to do so. ' U. S.  intelligence officials have said they do not believe that  Iranian officials have made a decision to produce a nuclear weapon.   The U. S.  has not disclosed any hard evidence that Iran has resumed  weapons research that, according to a 2007 U. S.  intelligence  estimate, ended in 2003. However, Yukiya Amano, the head of the International Atomic Energy  Agency, the global nuclear watchdog, told the IAEA board Monday that  the agency has acquired new 'information related to possible past or  current undisclosed nuclear related activities that seem to point to  the existence of possible military dimensions to Iran's nuclear  programme. 'President Obama, after a brief and unsuccessful effort at engagement  with Iran, has focused on sanctions to try to convince Tehran to  suspend uranium enrichment.  The policy has  failed to achieve its goal  in part because of high oil prices and China's deepening involvement  in the Iranian economy.  Obama has said repeatedly that an Iran equipped with nuclear weapons  is 'unacceptable'. Greg Thielmann, a senior fellow at the Arms Control Association and  veteran nuclear expert at the State Department, told IPS that while  he thinks the chances of an unprovoked U. S.  attack on Iran in the  next two years is 'very low', some Israeli officials will continue to  press for U. S.  military action. 'Some in Israel want to prod us into an attack while others want to  wave the saber so that the U. S.  will have more sanctions and not  consider talking to Iran,' Thielmann said. Any attack on Iran's nuclear facilities would probably not destroy  all the sites, would certainly not eliminate Iran's nuclear knowledge  and could provoke formidable retaliation against Israel by Iranian  partners such as Hezbollah and against U. S.  troops in Afghanistan and  Iraq. Meir Dagan, the former chief of the Israeli intelligence agency, the  Mossad, said recently that an Israeli strike on Iran's nuclear  installations would be 'the stupidest thing I have ever heard'.  This  provoked harsh criticism of him by Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin  Netanyahu and Defence Minister Ehud Barak. 'They're not arguing with his logic,' Thielmann said.  'They are  arguing with his right to talk about this publicly. 'Fallon said the best solution would be negotiations with Iran but  that 'it takes two to tango'. 'The interests of both people are better addressed with engagement  and cooperation rather than antagonism and hostility [but] there is  no clear path to this preferred alternative anytime soon,' he said. 