Africa's handling of the Libyan crisis at the United Nations  has been timorous and confusing, but it presents an  opportunity as well as a challenge for the continental body on  how it defines its future strategic interests. Rather than acting decisively, the African Union (AU) cowered to  pressures from the West and voted for U. N.  Security Council  Resolution 1973, which authorised military action in Libya. The African support of the U. N.  resolution was a mistake not only  because it undermined the existing mechanisms and processes that are  relevant for human protection on the continent but also because the  now two-month-long military response in Libya to protect civilians  has since degenerated into a plan to embolden Libyan rebels fighting  to oust the country's leader, Muammar Al Gaddafi, from power. The Mar.  17, 2011 U. N.  resolution on Libya is historic but  problematic.  It marked the first time the Security Council has  authorised a military response to protect civilian populations in a  non-consenting state.  The action, according to the U. S.  and its  allies, was necessary to protect civilians from a leader who has 'no  conscience' and was intent on committing mass atrocities.  The resolution is based on an emerging human rights norm, not law,  known as the Responsibility to Protect (R2P).  According to this  principle the international community has a responsibility to  intervene in sovereign territories to prevent and halt mass  atrocities.   R2P remains controversial and the Libyan events  exacerbates (rather than eases) our understanding of its application. For instance, are armed rebels trying to overthrow that government  civilians or combatants? Does the claim of civilian protection  justify attacking pro-regime forces? Further, does the call for  regime change by the sponsors of the resolution, and the wanton  civilian deaths that have occurred as a result of the intervention,  not dilute the case for R2P?Though the AU now balks at the idea of toppling the Gaddafi regime,  that objective was no secret.  On Feb.  26, three weeks before the U. N.   vote, the U. S.  insisted that Gaddafi had lost legitimacy and should  go. This notwithstanding, all three African countries (South Africa,  Gabon and Nigeria) on the Security Council voted in favour of  military action, allowing the resolution to pass by one vote more  than was required.   China even noted that it had not exercised its  veto powers out of respect for the wishes of the Arab League and the  African Union. Africans weakened their own peace architecture by supporting the U. N.   resolution.  On Mar.  10, 2011, the AU Peace and Security Council  established a committee comprising of the heads of states of  Mauritania, Congo, Mali, South Africa, Uganda, as well as the  chairperson of the AU Commission to find a political solution to the  crisis. The group was scheduled to meet both sides to the conflict in Tripoli  on Mar.  20.  It is rather puzzling that just two days before their own  peace mission was about to begin, African leaders voted to use force  in Libya. South Africa's vote is particularly interesting because it was on  both the AU Libya committee and the U. N.  Security Council.  South  Africa's envoy reportedly failed to show up for the final vote,  causing Susan Rice, the U. S.  ambassador to the U. N. , to dash out of  the Security Council chambers in search of him to cast an affirmative  vote.  It was also revealed later that U. S.  President Barack Obama had  personally pressed President Jacob Zuma of South Africa to support  the resolution. Having voted for the resolution, the five African presidents had to  request permission from the Security Council in order to travel to  Libya due to the no-fly zone restrictions.  They were humiliated when  their request to travel was initially denied.  Indeed, the bombing  campaign started on the very day they were scheduled to arrive there. It was not until two weeks later, on Apr.  10, that their request was  approved.  If the Africa leaders had not voted for the resolution,  they would not have had to ask permission of non-Africans in order to  resolve this continental crisis. Finally, if African leaders really believed that humanitarian  intervention were needed in Libya, they could have acted independent  of the U. N.  Article 4(h) of the AU Act gives the AU the right to  intervene forcibly in one of its member states with regards to war  crimes, genocide, and crimes against humanity.   Thus if the AU was  convinced that Gaddafi was committing mass atrocious crimes, they  could have taken unilateral action without recourse to the U. N. The U. N. -sanctioned war in Libya is unfortunate.  Libya has the  highest development on the continent in terms of education, health  and wealth.  According to last year's U. N.  human development report,  Libya even outperformed Brazil, Russia, India, China and South Africa  — the BRICS group of fastest growing economies. The war also deals a blow to the AU aspirations for a united and  strong Africa.  Ruthless and erratic as he may be, Gaddafi, having led  the transformation of the Organization of African Unity (OAU) to the  present AU, champions the pan-Africanist vision like no other current  African leader. The Libya debacle provides an opportunity for the AU to elaborate on  its principles of democracy and human rights, the basis of the  current war.  The AU needs clear and consistent guidelines on what it  means by consent of the governed.   In the case of Libya, they ought  to have a discussion on whether the political system outlined in  Gaddafi's green book is legitimate. Clarifying the parametres for democratic governance will give the AU  a rationale to expel noncompliant members.  Similarly, the AU should  have a common rationale on when interventions designed to end large- scale human suffering are warranted and how they would be carried  out.  The AU meeting this month in Equatorial Guinea could be a venue  to begin discussing such issues. *Dr.  Kwame Akonor teaches international relations at Seton Hall  University in the U. S.  state of New Jersey.   He is also the director  of the University's Center for Africana Studies and the African  Development Institute, a New York-based think tank.  Dr.  Akonor's most  recent publication 'Assessing the African Union's Right of  Humanitarian Intervention' appeared in Criminal Justice Ethics (2010)  29 (2):157-173. 