During his intensive initial round of media interviews as  commander in Afghanistan in August 2010, Gen.  David Petraeus  released figures to the news media that claimed spectacular  success for raids by Special Operations Forces: in a 90-day  period from May through July, SOF units had captured 1,355  rank and file Taliban, killed another 1,031, and killed or  captured 365 middle or high-ranking Taliban. The claims of huge numbers of Taliban captured and killed continued  through the rest of 2010.  In December, Petraeus's command said a  total of 4,100 Taliban rank and file had been captured in the  previous six months and 2,000 had been killed.  Those figures were critical to creating a new media narrative hailing  the success of SOF operations as reversing what had been a losing  U. S.  strategy in Afghanistan. But it turns out that more than 80 percent of those called captured  Taliban fighters were released within days of having been picked up,  because they were found to have been innocent civilians, according to  official U. S.  military data.  Even more were later released from the main U. S.  detention facility  at Bagram airbase called the Detention Facility in Parwan after  having their files reviewed by a panel of military officers. The timing of Petraeus's claim of Taliban fighters captured or  killed, moreover, indicates that he knew that four out of five of  those he was claiming as 'captured Taliban rank and file' were not  Taliban fighters at all.  Checking on the claims of the number of Taliban commanders and rank  and file killed is impossible, but the claims of Taliban captured  could be checked against official data on admission of detainees  added to Parwan.  An Afghan detained by U. S.  or NATO forces can only be held in a  Forward Operating Base for a maximum of 14 days before a decision  must be made about whether to release the individual or send him to  Parwan for longer-term detention.  IPS has now obtained an unclassified graph by Task Force 435, the  military command responsible for detainee affairs, on Parwan's  monthly intake and release totals for 2010, which shows that only 270  detainees were admitted to that facility during the 90-day period  from May through July 2010.  That figure also includes alleged Taliban commanders who were sent to  Parwan and whom Petraeus counted separately from the rank and file  figure.  Thus more than four out of every five Afghans said to have  been Taliban fighters captured during that period had been released  within two weeks as innocent civilians. When Petraeus decided in mid-August to release the figure of 1,355  Taliban rank and file allegedly captured during the 90-day period, he  already knew that 80 percent or more of that total had already been  released.  Major Sunset R.  Belinsky, the ISAF press officer for SOF operations,  conceded to IPS last September that the 1,355 figure applied only to  'initial detentions'.   Task Force 435 commander Adm.  Robert Harward confirmed in a press  briefing for Journalists Nov.  30, 2010 that 80 percent of the Afghans  detained by the U. S.  military during the entire year to that point  had been released within two weeks.  'This year, in this battlespace, approximately 5,500 individuals have  been detained,' Harward said, adding the crucial fact that 'about  1,100 have come to the detention facility in Parwan. ' Harward did not explain the discrepancy between the two figures,  however, and no journalist attending the Pentagon briefing asked for  such an explanation.  Petraeus continued to exploit media ignorance of the discrepancy  between the number of Taliban rank and file said to have been  'captured' and the number actually sent to the FDIP.   In early December, ISAF gave Bill Roggio, a blogger for 'The Long War  Journal' website, the figure of more than 4,100 'enemy fighters'  captured from Jun.  1 through Nov.  30, along with 2,000 rank and file  Taliban killed.  But during those six months, only 690 individuals were sent to  Parwan, according to the Task Force 435 data — 17 percent of the  4,100 Taliban rank and file claimed captured as 'Taliban'.    The total of 690 detainees also includes an unknown number of  commanders counted separately by Petraeus and a large number of  detainees who were later released from Parwan.  Considering those two  factors, the actual proportion of those claimed as captured Taliban  who were found not to be part of the Taliban organisation rises to 90  percent or even higher.  Three hundred forty-five detainees, or 20 percent of the 1,686 total  number of those who were detained in Parwan from June through  November, were released upon review of their cases, according to the  same Feb.  5, 2011 Task Force document obtained by IPS.  The vast  majority of those released from the facility had been sent to Parwan  in June or later. Detainees are released from Parwan only when the evidence against  them is so obviously weak or nonexistent that U. S officers cannot  justify continuing to hold them, despite the fact that the detainees  lack normal procedural rights in the 'non-adversarial' hearing by the  Task Force's Detainee Review.  The deliberate confusion sowed by Petraeus by referring to anyone  picked up for interrogation as a captured rank and file Taliban was a  key element of a carefully considered strategy for creating a more  favourable image of the war. As Associated Press reporter Kimberly Dozier wrote in a Sep.  3, 2010  news analysis after an interview with Petraeus, he was very conscious  that 'demonstrating progress is difficult in a war fought in hundreds  of small, scattered engagements, where frontlines do not move and  where cities do not fall. 'SOF raids, however, could be turned into a dramatic story line.  'The  mystique of elite, highly trained commandos swooping down on an  unsuspecting Taliban leader in the dead of night plays well back  home,' wrote Dozier, 'especially at a time when much of the news from  Afghanistan focuses on rising American deaths and frustration with  the Afghan government. 'Petraeus made sure the impact of the new SOF narrative would be  maximised by presenting the total of Afghans swept up in SOF raids as  actual Taliban fighters. The deceptive nature of those statistics, as now revealed by U. S.   military data, raises anew the question of whether the statistics  released by Petraeus on killing of alleged Taliban were similarly  skewed. *Gareth Porter is an investigative historian and journalist  specialising in U. S.  national security policy.  The paperback edition  of his latest book, 'Perils of Dominance: Imbalance of Power and the  Road to War in Vietnam', was published in 2006. 