It is almost obligatory these days to subtitle books on  Pakistan with some conjunction of 'failed', 'dangerous',  'lawless', 'deadly', 'frightening' or 'tumultuous'.  Pakistan  is a 'tinderbox', forever on the brink, in the eye of the  storm, or descending into chaos.  It is an 'Insh'allah nation'  where people passively wait for Allah. In the narrow space 'between the mosque and the military', there is  much 'crisis', 'terrorism', 'militancy' and 'global jihad. ' British author and policy analyst Anatol Lieven's refreshingly  understated title 'Pakistan: A Hard Country' eschews emotion for  description, which is fitting because the book is a 519-page myth- busting exercise.   Lieven, currently a fellow at the New America Foundation, argues that  some of the alarmist claims about Pakistan are indeed true - it is a  corrupt, chaotic, violent, oppressive and unjust country.  But it is  also a remarkably resilient one.  It is not nearly as unequal as India  or Nigeria, or for that matter the United States. Its security is beset by multiple insurgencies but they affect a  smaller proportion of its territory than the ones India face.  Its  cities are violent, but no more so than those of comparable size in  Latin or even North America. It has an abysmally low rate of tax collection, but, at five percent  of the GDP, it also has one of the world's highest rates of  charitable donations.  It is no doubt corrupt, but this is due less to  the absence of values than to the enduring grip of the old ones of  loyalty to family and clan.  Beneath the chaotic surface, the country is held together by the  underlying structures of kinship and patronage which account for its  relative stability.  Leaders of kinship networks derive their  legitimacy from property ownership and the capacity to provide  protection and patronage to followers. This creates a degree of accountability and wealth redistribution  since in order to retain the followers' loyalty, leaders have to  secure and distribute patronage - and in a country endowed with  modest resources and decrepit industry, much of it is stolen from the  state.  However, the same forces that ensure Pakistan's stability also impede  its progress.  The primacy of clan loyalty over civic responsibility  has served as a barrier to the development of modern democratic  institutions. Both civilian and authoritarian military governments have been  frustrated in their attempts at reform.  Little changes whether the  country is ruled by a dictator or a democrat, because both have to  sit atop and draw support from the same pyramid of kinship networks.   The military, which functions relatively more efficiently than other  institutions, has insulated itself against these forces by turning  itself into the biggest kinship group of them all, securing itself  the largest share of the state's revenues.  The economy (to which Lieven unfortunately gives very little space)  becomes yet another victim of this system.  Indeed, 'the most  economically dynamic sections of the Pakistani population are those  which have to a greater or lesser extent been shaken loose from their  traditional cultural patterns and kinship allegiances by mass  migration,' he writes.  These include the Muhajirs of Karachi and the  migrants from East Punjab.  Pakistan, writes Lieven, is a 'highly conservative, archaic, even  sometimes quite inert and somnolent mass of different societies, with  two modernizing impulses fighting to wake it up' - the Westernised  liberals and the Islamists.  Both have been stymied by the nature of  Pakistani society as much as by the liberals' identification with the  deeply-loathed United States and the Islamists inability to overcome  the political quietism of the conservative, highly superstitious  Islam practised by most Pakistanis. In their confrontation with each other, both 'see the battle between  them as apocalyptic, ending with the triumph of good or evil', yet  their chances of success are equally grim. Lieven carefully unravels the various strands of Islamism and gives a  measured assessment of their relative influence in Pakistan.  What is  notable, he writes, is less the strength of Pakistan's Islamists than  their weakness.  The same kinship networks, loyalty to hereditary  saints, and the potpourri of sects and sub-sects are barriers which  also prevent the spread of Islamism.  With the partial exception of  the Jamaat-e-Islami, he notes, Islamists have themselves been  swallowed up by the patronage system.  Lieven is concerned with the treatment of women in Pakistan, and some  of the incidents he describes are horrific indeed.  But unlike other  Western commentators, he is careful to note that contrary to popular  myth, the worst abuses against women are sanctioned by the  traditional customary law rather than the Sharia. The case of Mukhtar Mai's gang rape and the lesser known (at least in  the West) story of the Baloch girls who were shot and buried alive  for choosing to marry out of clan are instructive in this regard.   Both were sanctioned by tribal customary law.  However, Lieven notes that the murder of the Baloch girls somehow  elicited far less outrage from Pakistan's liberal elite than an  incident that happened around the same time involving the public  flogging of a girl in Swat.  The outrage around that incident proved  one of the catalysts for the subsequent military operation there. But Lieven fails to pursue the implications of this comment further.   Of course the reason why the Swat incident attracted more attention  is that it had entered the 'war on terror' narrative where a whole  industry has flourished, thriving on exaggeration and fear.  Lieven rejects the alarmist claims which portray Pakistan as on the  verge of Islamist takeover but warns that things would be less  certain if the U. S.  were to intervene directly on Pakistani soil,  potentially triggering a military revolt.  The insurgency at present  only affects a very small stretch of Pakistani territory and, as  demonstrated by the offensive in Swat, it can be crushed when the  state makes a determined effort. Lieven considers the Swat campaign a success but acknowledges that  the terrorist threat in the rest of the country has increased.  But  these are not simply parallel developments; there is a causal  relationship between them. There was never any doubt that the Pakistani army had the capacity to  crush the Taliban but the real question was always the costs and  consequences of such an operation.  Predictably, the use of blunt  force has turned a geographically delimited insurgency into an  amorphous terrorist threat against which the state can do very  little.  Lieven is categorically opposed to military intervention in Pakistan  and marshals some eminently reasonable policy recommendations in his  brief conclusions. For Lieven, Pakistan is resilient enough to survive the terrorist  threat, but the danger which could really precipitate its collapse is  climate change.  A country which receives at an average only 240mm of  annual rainfall and is overly dependant on the Indus will be  seriously at risk as its already large population grows further and  water tables drop unless it makes efforts to better preserve its  water resources and prevent waste.  Unlike most Western writers who go looking for interlocutors in their  own image - secular, liberal, Westernised - Lieven's research  includes a remarkable range of voices, including soldiers, Islamists,  policemen, peasants, a president, and taxi drivers.  He is  sympathetic, but rarely credulous.  He is particularly sceptical of  the Pakistani elite - 'even, or especially, when their statements  seem to correspond to Western liberal ideology, and please Western  journalists and officials'. Lieven brings an anthropologist's rigour, a journalist's intuition  and a travel writer's descriptive power to a book which is  perceptive, nuanced, and eminently readable.  The book is illustrated  with telling, sometimes amusing, anecdotes.  But its greatest strength  is that it shakes Westerners and Pakistanis alike from the complacent  assumptions that underlie their respective political discourses. *Muhammad Idrees Ahmad is a Glasgow-based sociologist.  He edits  Pulsemedia. org and can be reached at idrees@pulsemedia. org.  You can  also follow him on Twitter: @im_pulse. 