The International Criminal Court (ICC) issued warrants Monday  for the arrest of Libyan leader Colonel Muammar Gaddafi, his  son Seif al-Islam al-Gaddafi, and the Libyan chief of  intelligence, Abdullah al-Senussi, for crimes against  humanity. Specifically, the ICC cited evidence of murder and persecution  from  Feb.  15 to Feb.  28, during initial anti-government protests and  demonstrations.  The United Nations Security Council passed a resolution in late  February that referred the situation in Libya to the prosecutor of  the ICC and requested that Libyan authorities 'shall cooperate fully  with' the ICC's activities regarding Libya. On May 16, two weeks after opening an investigation into the  situation in Libya, ICC Prosecutor Luis Moreno-Ocampo requested that  the arrest warrants be issued. Although Libya is not one of the 116 countries to recognise the court  (Tunisia, the most recent, joined two days ago), the ICC does have  jurisdiction over war crimes, crimes against humanity, and genocide  in that country because of the Security Council's February referral.  What the ICC lacks, however, is the capability to arrest those it  seeks.  That responsibility lies with countries and their governments.  New York-based Human Rights Watch (HRW) hailed the warrants,  calling  them a signal that 'the law can reach even those long thought to be  immune to accountability. 'Arrests are next major stepMany experts recognise that the arrests themselves constitute  potential obstacles to bringing Gaddafi and the two others to  justice, although they hesitate to assume the absolute worst, where  arrests take years, even over a decade, to take place.  Still, the ICC's reliance upon individual countries to carry out  arrests inherently presents challenges, particularly when state  authorities themselves could be complicit in the very crimes for  which others are being arrested.  In that paradox, said Richard Dicker, director of the International  Justice programme at HRW, 'lies the weakness' of many international  tribunals and courts. In an interview with IPS, Dicker said, 'The road between warrant and  arrest can be a lengthy one,' and he called the apprehension  component of the ICC a 'weak link'. No one can predict the speed or time frame in which Gaddafi, Seif  Gaddafi, and al-Senussi could be arrested, and history provides few  reliable indicators. Indicted by the International Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia in  1995 for war crimes including genocide, Ratko Mladic was arrested  just last month.  Yet a warrant for Charles Taylor, former leader of Liberia, was  issued in June 2003, and in March 2006 was he arrested - three years  that, compared to Mladic, seem relatively short. Albeit often slow, the international justice system has been  'extremely effective' in bringing to justice individuals responsible  for mass crimes, William Pace, convener of the Coalition for the  International Criminal Court (CICC), was quick to point out in an  interview with IPS.  Still, he acknowledged that at times the arrests sought for such  crimes could take a long time.  Ultimately, the results depend on the  cooperation of Libyan authorities and whether they can arrest and  surrender Gaddafi to the ICC. Security Council meetsMeanwhile, in the U. N.  Security Council Monday, 100 days after NATO  operations began in Libya, Undersecretary General for Political  Affairs B.  Lynn Pascoe briefed members on what he called a 'fragile  situation in the region'. NATO maintained its air strikes in the Gaddafi stronghold of Tripoli,  he said, and about 50 miles from there, heavy fighting continued. On the humanitarian front, he said that as of Jun.  23, more than 1. 1  million people had fled Libya, but that since May 29, U. N.   humanitarian teams had been able to access some areas to provide aid. In the same meeting, South Africa's representative conveyed the  demands of the African Union, including 'immediate pause in fighting  and NATO-led bombings in order to provide a respite to the civilian  population. 'NATO has come under criticism for civilian casualties resulting from  its air strikes.  Last week it admitted that one of its aerial attacks  had killed nine civilians. The South African representative stressed, 'A political rather than a  military solution is the only way' to achieve peace in Libya.  A spokesperson for the secretary-general of the U. N.  had no comment  on the issuance of the warrants, citing the fact that the ICC is a  body independent of the U. N. Future stepsMoreno-Ocampo said he might open a second investigation into crimes  committed during the armed conflict between the government and NATO- backed rebels, as the current investigation pertains only to the  weeks before armed conflict began and escalated.  In addition to applying to a limited time period, the existing arrest  warrants are only for crimes against humanity, for which reasonable  evidence exists, not war crimes.  Human Rights Watch has said that it would urge the prosecutor to  investigate possible crimes committed by all actors in the armed  conflict, including NATO and rebel forces.  Despite prevailing uncertainties, Pace remained optimistic, calling  the impact of the warrants 'hopeful' and noting that actions  regarding Libya taken by 'regional organisations, the Security  Council, the Arab regional governments and NATO military efforts have  almost certainly prevented massive additional crimes against  humanity. 'In the end, he suggested, their efforts 'could result in the removal  of another repressive dictatorship'. 