Civilians in south Sudan say jets from the north are launching  attacks on villages close to the border. Al Jazeera has obtained exclusive pictures of the village of Jaw  after it was allegedly bombed by the Sudanese air force.  Among the  dead are women and children, Al Jazeera's Haru Mutasa reported from  south Sudan. The violence came on the eve of a visit by Omar al-Bashir, Sudan's  president, to China. Bashir said on Monday that his country's relations with China will  not be weakened by Beijing's ties with Southern Sudan. In remarks made before his four-day visit, Bashir said he was not  troubled by Beijing's dual loyalties. 'Our policy, and also China's, stands on the principle that each  country is free to adopt the procedures and build relations in the  manner that preserves its interests and relations,' he told China's  official Xinhua news agency. 'Therefore, even if China has established relations with the south  Sudan state, that will definitely not be a deduction on its relations  with the north. 'Declaration of independenceBashir's visit to China, a major buyer of Sudanese crude oil, comes  days before south Sudan is to split from the north and become the  world's newest sovereign nation. Southern Sudan's secession on Jul.  9 is likely to feature in Bashir's  talks with Hu Jintao, his Chinese counterpart. China has been building ties with the emerging state in Southern  Sudan but continues to be one of the major supporters of Bashir, who  faces indictment from the International Criminal Court over war  crimes charges stemming from long-running fighting in the Darfur  region. The south's declaration of independence in July will be the  culmination of a 2005 peace deal that ended more than two decades of  civil war that killed about two million people. While south Sudan's independence is expected to take place on  schedule, crucial issues remain unresolved. The areas of debate include: the future of the disputed region of  Abyei, which is supposed to be decided in a referendum; the north- south border demarcation; how oil revenues and other resources will  be shared; and citizenship. *Published under an agreement with Al-Jazeera. 