When the five-month-old political standoff in Cote d'Ivoire  came to an end in early April, the strife-torn West African  nation was expected to return to normal - later than sooner. But the political crisis triggered by a disputed presidential election  has been followed by a spreading humanitarian crisis. The Office of the U. N.  Coordinator for Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA)  says hundreds of thousands of civilians remain displaced more than two  months after former president Laurent Gbagbo surrendered, ending a  violent stalemate after he lost a U. N. -certified presidential run-off  election to Alassane Ouattara last November. According to the Office of the U. N.  High Commissioner for Refugees  (UNHCR), an estimated 142,000 Ivorian refugees remain in neighbouring  Liberia while OCHA has been providing food and medical supplies to  over 100,000 households. Of all the vulnerable groups in the country, the most affected are  nearly a million children, most of whom either stay home or have  returned to schools looted or destroyed during the fighting. The U. N.  Children's agency UNICEF and the U. S. -based non-governmental  organisation Save the Children have been actively involved in a 'Back  to School' initiative with support from the Ministry of Education. Dr.  Jordan Naidoo, a senior education advisor at UNICEF, told IPS the  educational system in Cote d'Ivoire has been severely affected since  the contested presidential election results late last year. Although schools were scheduled to reopen on Jan. 3, a call for civil  disobedience by the pro-Ouattara coalition caused schools in the  Center, North and West (CNO) areas to remain closed. And as a result, she pointed out, at least 800,000 children missed out  on four to six months of school. In addition, schools in Abidjan shut down when violent fighting  erupted between military forces in the economic capital at the end of  March. 'All in all, UNICEF estimates that one million children have had their  education severely disrupted due to the post-electoral crisis,' said  Naidoo. Still, it is encouraging to see that 85 percent of children are back  in the classroom in the last two months across the country, she said. 'But, we cannot forget that 250,000 have not gone back and that  another one million (have never been to school).  Our mission at the  moment is to ensure that each and every child goes back to school.   After all, it is their right,' she added. Guy Cave, country director for Save the Children in Cote d'Ivoire,  says education is a right of all children and is essential to their  development. One million children were already out of school before the crisis, and  of those who had the chance to go to school, many were unable to  complete even their basic education, he said. And hundreds of thousands of additional children were then forced out  of school for several months, Cave added. Asked about the status of teachers, infrastructure, and school  supplies in Cote d'Ivoire, Naidoo told IPS that many teachers fled the  violence and are missing in classrooms where they are desperately  needed. Buildings were damaged in armed violence and supplies were lost,  looted or destroyed during the months of conflict, she said. UNICEF recently registered 224 attacks against schools in the country,  including 180 schools that were looted, 23 schools occupied by  military forces, and 20 schools touched by mortar shells. 'There is an urgent need for investments in infrastructure, school  furniture, and provision of teaching and learning materials,' Naidoo  said. She said student-teacher ratios in Cote d'Ivoire, as in many  developing countries, are very skewed.  School infrastructure is also  limited. Just 16. 9 percent of schools in the CNO area have the required number  of desks in classrooms.  Only 21. 5 percent of schools in the CNO areas  have at least one latrine which works.  And most schools also lack  potable and non-potable water. She said emergencies often provide opportunities to build back better  and UNICEF will work with partners to improve access and quality of  education for all children, by ensuring that learning environments are  safe, protective, and conducive to learning.  Asked how UNICEF plans to achieve its objective of helping displaced  children back to school, Naidoo said UNICEF is leading inter-agency  efforts to assess the needs of Ivorian refugees in the Liberian border  communities as well as support educational planning in both countries. 'We have also conducted an assessment of the effectiveness of school  reopening that targeted all public primary schools in the country,'  she said. UNICEF with its partners is also engaged in several other initiatives  to achieve this objective. 'We have been taking the lead along with Save the Children to  facilitate coordination among humanitarian stakeholders intervening in  the education sector,' Naidoo said. Last week, UNICEF and the Ministry of Education organised a workshop  to launch the 'Back to School' initiative, which targets one million  children through a four-tiered strategy that engages communities  through social mobilisation efforts, improving learning environments  by the provision of teaching and learning materials and infrastructure  repairs, teacher training on psychosocial support, and institutional  support to the ministry.  'Also during the past few months, we have been setting up temporary  learning spaces and equipping them with School in a Box, recreation  and early childhood development kits in sites in the West and in  Abidjan,' Naidoo said. Today, she said, over 13,000 children aged 3-18 participate in daily  education and recreation activities within sites for internally  displaced people.  Some 26,000 others have been integrated into formal  schools in host communities.  UNICEF is also advocating for the school feeding programmes to resume  immediately, as this supports student learning and incentivises school  attendance and improves learning achievements.  