'We are in a multi-polar world now,' Robert Gates told a  Washington Post columnist within a year of his taking over the  Pentagon in early 2007. Such an assertion, of course, sounds entirely banal today, nearly  three years after the outbreak of a global financial crisis that  would underline Washington's relative decline vis-à-vis China and  other emerging powers and bolster the perception that the 21st  century was unlikely to be as 'American' as the last one. But, at the time, it was anathema to the neo-conservatives and other  hawks, led by Vice President Dick Cheney, who, in the aftermath of  the 9/11 attacks on New York and the Pentagon, drove the U. S.  into  two costly wars and doubled a defence budget that was already greater  than the combined spending by the world's next 20 biggest militaries  in order to affirm that the world was in fact 'unipolar'. For Gates, who replaced the strutting, no-nonsense — but ultimately  clueless — Donald Rumsfeld, it was one of a number of statements  designed to nudge his country into a more realistic understanding of  its place in the world, and, more precisely, the limits to its vast  military power. Whether he succeeded in that effort remains unclear, but, as he  leaves the capital at the end of this week for his retirement home in  'the other Washington' on the U. S.  Northwest coast, few here doubt  that he will be remembered as one of the most influential secretaries  of defence in the country's history. 'James Forrestal created the Department of Defence, Robert McNamara  created its modern structure, and Gates has taken it from a hegemonic  posture to one that is more realistic,' according to John Prados, a  national security historian and author of a dozen books on the  subject. 'For most of his career, U. S.  power could not be opposed, and the  only questions were where and how we wanted to intervene and have our  way,' Prados told IPS.  'I see Robert Gates as appreciating that there  are limits to our power and attempting to re-align the defence  organisation and our actual policies accordingly. ' 'In Washington, it's no longer considered a sin to question American  omnipotence,' wrote Andrew Bacevich, a retired Army colonel and  author who teaches international relations at Boston University on  tomdispatch. com this week.  '(T)he Gates legacy is likely to be found  in his willingness — however belated — to acknowledge the limits of  American power. 'Gates' tenure as defence secretary has been unique in many ways, not  least his status as the only Pentagon chief to be retained by an  incoming administration - Barack Obama's - of a different party.  As  he himself has noted in recent farewell interviews, his breed of  bipartisanship in an increasingly partisan Washington has become an  endangered species. Perhaps more compelling was his transformation from a career CIA  Soviet analyst during the Cold War with a reputation for arrogance,  political and bureaucratic opportunism, and shading his reports to  suit his bosses' most-hawkish ideological predilections to a nearly  universally respected senior statesman willing to speak inconvenient  truths to leaders who would rather not hear them. Indeed, it was his service as deputy CIA director under the  aggressively anti-Communist crusader and Iran-Contra mastermind  William Casey that resulted in his failed nomination by Ronald Reagan  to take over the agency after Casey's death in 1987, although he was  approved for the job — over strong Democratic opposition -- when he  was nominated by President George H. W.  Bush four years later. After Bush's defeat to Bill Clinton in 1992, Gates followed his boss  back to Texas where he became president of Texas A&M University. It was as a member of Bush's foreign policy team — perhaps the most  coherent and effective since World War II — that Gates firmly  established his reputation as both a master bureaucrat and as a  Republican foreign policy 'realist'.  It is a breed deeply sceptical  of the kinds of foreign policy adventures favoured by the party's  neo-conservatives and aggressive nationalists, as well as 'liberal  interventionists' in the Democratic Party, particularly if they  involved the use of U. S.  military power. Whether George W.  Bush by November 2006 had come to share that  scepticism is unclear — most of the neo-conservatives had left the  administration by then, and Cheney's and Rumsfeld's influence was  definitely on the wane.  But once Gates took over the Pentagon, the  hawks' decline accelerated sharply. 'To move the administration away from the neo-cons and on a realist  trajectory, Gates proved pivotal,' said Steve Clemons, American  Strategy director at the New America Foundation. 'He brought the Bush administration back to the centre and to a more  moderate brand of internationalism after a more extremist first  term,' agreed Charles Kupchan of the Council on Foreign Relations.  Gates cleaned out Pentagon officials who had either actively  supported or excessively deferred to Rumsfeld and Cheney, replacing  them with far more independent-minded officers, most importantly Adm.   Mike Mullen as Chairman of the Joint Chiefs, who made his opposition  to either a U. S.  or Israeli attack on Iran crystal clear.  Using his considerable bureaucratic skills, he also recommended like- minded policymakers for critical posts, such as Adm.  Mike McConnell,  with whom he had worked closely under the elder Bush, for Director of  National Intelligence (DNI).  The two men pushed hardest for the White  House to release the summary of the 2007 National Intelligence  Estimate (NIE) that effectively stopped a Cheney and neo-conservative  drive to rally support for an attack on Tehran's nuclear facilities  dead in its tracks. 'If one person were to receive the top credit for preventing an  attack on Iran's nuclear facilities, it would be Gates,' wrote Ido  Oren, an international relations professor at the University of  Florida this week. Working with Condoleezza Rice and later with Hillary Clinton under  Obama, he promoted a 'reset' of relations with Russia, doggedly  pursued a renewal - after a deep freeze enforced by Rumsfeld - of  military ties with China, and constantly talked up the virtues of  'soft power', becoming the first defence secretary to lobby for major  increases in the State Department and foreign aid budgets. 'I've heard him say repeatedly that we over-militarise our responses  to national security challenges,' Clemons told IPS.  'And while the  challenge of rebalancing resources from the military to the civilian  agencies will take a long time, he's laid the groundwork for that to  happen in a compelling way. 'And while the Pentagon budget has continued to grow in real terms  even under Obama, Gates, as well as Mullen - who last year warned   that the national debt posed the single greatest threat to national  security - became ever more insistent that Washington could no longer  afford it. 'What's clear is that Gates recognised we'd gotten ourselves  seriously over-extended, and once the financial meltdown happened,  that the resources available for the military were inevitably going  to shrink,' said Stephen Walt, an influential Harvard international  relations professor who writes a blog for foreignpolicy. com.  'It didn't take a genius to figure this out, but it took someone who  was experienced, largely devoid of ideology, and wasn't looking for  another job down the road to say all these things. 'Indeed, as his tenure has wound down, he has become increasingly  outspoken, even alarmist, about the country's future if it does not  come to terms with the limits to its power.  'In my opinion, any future defence secretary who advises the  president to again send a big American land army into Asia or into  the Middle East or Africa should 'have his head examined,' as Gen.   (Douglas) MacArthur so delicately put it,' he told West Point cadets  in February. 'I've spent my entire adult life with the United States as a  superpower and one that had no compunction about spending what it  took to sustain that position,' he told The DailyBeast just last  week.  '. . . This is a different time,' he went on, noting that he was  retiring at the right moment. 'Because frankly. . .  I wouldn't want to be part of a government that  is being forced to dramatically scale back our engagement with the  rest of the world.  '. . . My hope is that those fears are unfounded, that we will figure  out a way . . . to sustain our presence around the world - and even  increase it in the Pacific.  But I think there are some very real  questions that are going to have to be answered in terms of the size  and shape of the U. S.  military,' he said. *Jim Lobe's blog on U. S.  foreign policy can be read at  http://www. lobelog. com. 