While humanitarian organisations try to bury the corpses scattered across  Southern Kordofan, aid to the thousands of people displaced by the fighting is  slow as the country’s humanitarian commission has prohibited most aid  organisations from working in the area. On Jun.  5 heavy fighting broke out between forces loyal to the Sudan People's Liberation Movement  (SPLM) and the Sudan Armed Forces (SAF) in Kadugli and other towns in the state.  Kadugli is the capital  of Southern Kordofan, one of Sudan's 25 states.  Since the start of the fighting, aerial bombardments were carried out by the SAF, which according to the  United Nations (U. N. ), lead to the displacement of 75,000 civilians from Kadugli, Kaunda and  surrounding areas with the numbers going up on a daily basis.  In addition, 35,000 are expected to head  to El Obeid, a town in north Kordofan. 'We have reports of ethnic Nubas being denied entrance to El Obeid.  They divide the displaced based on  ethnicity and the Nubas are (left) in the middle of nowhere under the scorching sun, ' said Fatima* a  human rights activist.   The Nubas, who are a minority in Southern Kordofan, are believed to have been targeted in the fighting.  Sudanese organisations and civil society groups are already calling for food donations and sending  trucks full of supplies to aid the people of Southern Kordofan. In an attempt to help out within their limited mandate, some humanitarian organisations are burying  corpses scattered in Southern Kordofan.  But the Humanitarian Affairs Commission (HAC), the body  responsible for coordinating all humanitarian affairs for local and international organisations in Sudan,  has prohibited the majority of local and international organisations from working there.  'We held a meeting with the HAC yesterday and we asked them to give us permission to aid the  displaced and they said that they are sending an investigative mission to assess the situation.  I don't  know when this will happen,' said Suhaila*, who works for a national development non-governmental  organisation in Khartoum. She said she was concerned about the availability of food in the region.  'This is the time right before farming begins, families are nearly running out of stored food and many of  the families living in safer towns are hosting displaced families and sharing their food with them,' said  Suhaila. Many displaced people are making public schools their homes as the summer season ends and the  rainy season begins in July. 'The government does not want to establish IDP (internationally displaced persons) camps, they said  they don't want this to turn into another Darfur, but people cannot simply go back to their homes.  The  situation is deteriorating, ' said Fatima. In January 10 states, which compromise the southern part of Sudan, voted in a referendum on whether  they want to remain part of the north or have a separate state.  Over 98 percent voted in favour of  secession.  But the security situation in the state became tense after Ahmed Haroun won the governorship of  Southern Kordofan in a controversial state election in May. Haroun is wanted by the International Criminal Court for war crimes and crimes against humanity in  Darfur for his involvement in instigating attacks and arming and recruiting militias to fight the  insurgency.  Haroun beat Abdel Aziz Al Helow, the SPLM's candidate in the elections. 'It is fair to say that 75 percent of civilians in the state are SPLM supporters but they lean towards the  National Congress Party (NCP), the ruling party, because they want to survive,' Samira*, an U. N.   employee said. She said prior to the elections the SPLM began distributing flyers through tea ladies, bakers and people  in the market area that warned of dire consequences if the NCP's candidate won the governorship. Samira arrived at work at the United Nations offices on Jun.  5 to find that many of her colleagues known  for their pro-SPLM sentiments had already fled the town. 'I started asking questions and wondering if something was going to happen.  The fighting started that  day and for the first time, there was a power cut in the entire city.  'Our only option was to hide under the bed or next to a wall because it was pitch black and it was hard  to locate where the gunshots were coming from,' said Samira.  She was evacuated and is now safe in  Khartoum with her family.  'I saw a large number of women and children fleeing the town and I could tell that they have been  walking for a long time. . .  I couldn't stop crying,' recalls Samira of the day she was evacuated.  But the fighting continues and Suhaila says that based on information received from her colleagues  working in Southern Kordofan, there have been a number of political assassinations.  'The SPLM launched attacks that targeted certain leaders loyal to the NCP and this sparked a retaliation  from the Khartoum government.  Even the citizens of Kadugli and other towns were asked to leave  because the situation became characterised by political assassinations,' said Suhaila. Suhaila added that there are snipers located in the mountains and her colleagues informed her that  politically active civilians have been shot dead inside their homes.  * Names have been changed to protect our sources. 