Like many Sri Lankans, Kandiah Selvadurai measures the improvement in his life  by the amount of money he spends on essentials.  When basic goods were scarce  more than two years ago, he paid dearly for them.  These days, he buys them for  a tiny fraction of what they used to cost. Still, life is hard.  In early 2009, a kilo of rice was so scarce Selvadurai was spending 2,500 rupees (25 dollars) or more to  buy it.  That was when he and tens of thousands of other civilians, almost all from the minority Tamil  community, were forced to live in a narrow swath of land on the northern shoreline as Sri Lanka’s  bloody civil war reached its final act.  These days, Selvadurai is back home in Allankulam, a village deep within the Vanni, the region in Sri  Lanka’s north where the conflict was once at its worst.  A kilo of rice now goes for 50 rupees (50 cents),  even less than it costs in other parts of the country.  Yet, when asked to describe life after the conflict,  all Selvadurai can say is, 'Difficult.  Life is still very difficult. '  But Selvadurai cannot help recall when times were harder, when food, medicines and everything else  was scarce in the Vanni, where the separatist Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE) were fighting their  last battles against government forces.  'A packet of Bedi (a local variety of rolled tobacco) was going at  3,500 rupees (33 dollars),' Selvadurai remembers.  The war brought back memories of more than just the high cost of goods.  Selvadurai saw men, women  and children hunkering down in hastily dug bunkers being blown to bits.  He does not want to talk of  those gruesome days in detail.  His wife was injured and will never fully recover, he tells IPS.  He is glad  that at least his two daughters live in the capital Colombo, about 330 km away from Allankulam.  After escaping the fighting, as the Tigers faced their eventual defeat, Selvadurai stayed for over six  months at government run camps for the displaced.  He returned to his home, or what was left of it, in  mid-2009.  There are 187 registered families in Allankulam, all of whom live in temporary or semi- permanent constructions that serve as houses.  Most of the houses have mud walls with tin-sheets as  roofs. One major development since the end of the war has been the improvement of a long section of the  north-to-south A9 highway bisecting Vanni.  The road has been re-laid and plans are afoot to widen it  to six lanes.  The road to Allankulam, on the other hand, has not even been given a new layer of tar, and is a  collection of potholes for a full stretch of about 20 kms from the main A9 highway.  Villagers look to the bicycle as the main form of transport.  Public transport services are almost  nonexistent.  Thousands of used bicycles, left behind by civilians as they fled the fighting, have been  distributed among the villagers.  Villagers survive on odd jobs, animal husbandry, paddy and vegetable cultivation.  There are no  permanent jobs and the only ones that offer a steady income are those held by the few government  employees, mainly teachers.  Instead of waiting for job opportunities, women have come together in groups to form collectives that  raise chickens or run small vegetable plots.  'We make about 300 rupees (2. 50 dollars) a day,' said  Thnagarasa Sivakolandy who runs a small vegetable plot with six others.  Officials from donor  organisations say over 60 percent of beneficiary families in Allankulam are headed by females.  With no new private investment coming in, villagers are increasingly looking for community groups to  generate income.  'If there are private businesses that are willing to come here, the villagers can earn far  more,' said Nagmani Rathnaraja, deputy director of the Reawakening Project, a joint initiative of the Sri  Lanka government and the World Bank to help develop the Vanni.   But only few big time companies have taken that step.  There is one that buys milk, while a tobacco  giant has indicated that it will assist in tobacco cultivation.  Rathnaraja told IPS that the government and development agencies assisting the region should take  special care to accelerate income generation.  'Infrastructure development is taking place, but we need  to make sure that people have income. ' Development has come to the region, but seems to have taken a rather selective approach.  The A9 and  towns that lie alongside it have benefited the most.  New shops, houses and other buildings are being  built on the A9, but nothing like that is taking place in Allankulam where villagers have to travel several  miles mostly on bicycle to the nearest dispensary.  The nearest main town, Mallavi, is where the medical facility is located and appears like an oasis on the  dry road with its row of shops, several banks, government offices and even a bar.   Some more enterprising returnees have benefited from the situation.  Kandan Namanadas saved money  that he earned from taking part in cash for work programmes carried out by the government and the  World Bank.  He then added about another 25,000 rupees (225 dollars) he had saved earlier and opened  a small grocery shop at Allankulam.  It is the only shop for some distance in the village.  'I make about 2,500 rupees (20 dollars) a day,' he said.  Now he wants to buy a small cooler and  generator.  'For that I need to apply for a loan.  But I don’t have properties to offer as collateral. 'Those like Selvadurai who survived the worst of the war now hope that they can enjoy the dividends of  peace like the rest of country.  For that to happen he knows that extra effort has to be taken to  distribute the resources better. 'Somebody should take the effort and bring jobs and development here, otherwise we will have good  roads, but no money,' he said.   