At least 11 people have been killed and dozens more wounded in  shelling by forces loyal to Muammar Gaddafi, the Libyan  leader, around the besieged rebel enclave of Misurata, the  rebels say. 'Eleven people were killed and 57 wounded, almost all of them  civilians,' a rebel source told the AFP news agency by telephone from  Misurata, 200km east of Tripoli, on Tuesday. The attacks marked another bloody milestone for a city that has been  shelled almost continuously since March. Sources said five rebels were killed in fighting at the western  entrance to the city earlier in the day. Meanwhile, Gerard Longuet, France's defence minister, questioned the  rebels' chances of defeating Gaddafi and pushing towards the capital. The expression of doubt came as reports emerged that the rebels had  launched what they called a promised attack on a key gateway to the  capital Tripoli.  There was no independent verification on the rebels'  claim. Curbing supportThe rebels have a 'growing capacity to organise politically and  militarily' but are 'currently not in a stabilised, centralised  system', Longuet said. He also said that the rebels were no longer in need of controversial  French weapons drops. 'There is emerging a political order distinct from that of Tripoli.   The [rebel] territories are organising their autonomy. . .  That is why  the parachute drops are no longer necessary,' he said. Across the Gulf of Sirte, on the eastern front line, a rebel  representative said nine Gaddafi soldiers were captured between  Ajdabiya and Brega. Amid the uneasy military stalemate, diplomatic talks continued about  a possible negotiated solution to the conflict, although no proposal  appears to have gained much traction yet. An unnamed senior Russian official was quoted on Tuesday as saying  Gaddafi would consider stepping down - an offer that, if realised,  would meet the rebels' central demand. 'The colonel is sending signals that he is ready to cede power in  exchange for security guarantees,' the respected business daily  Kommersant quoted the official as saying. The Russian source added that France appeared to be the country most  willing to play a part, by unfreezing some of the Gaddafi family's  accounts and promising to help him avoid trial at the International  Criminal Court in The Hague. 'No escape'The rebels have thus far rejected any deal that would leave Gaddafi  in power. 'There is no escape clause for Gaddafi - he must be removed from  power and face justice,' Mustafa Mohammed Abdel Jalil, Transitional  National Council (TNC) chief, said earlier this week. Meanwhile, preparations were underway for an international meeting on  Libya in Istanbul on Jul.  15-16.  TNC foreign affairs point man Mahmud  Jibril held talks with his Turkish and UAE counterparts on Tuesday. Recep Tayyip Erdogan, the prime minister of Turkey, whose country is  NATO's sole Muslim-majority member and an influential regional  player, has called on Gaddafi to cede power and leave Libya. The Jul.  15-16 meeting comes as diplomats increasingly mull what  post-Gaddafi Libya might look like, with many hoping to avoid Iraq or  Afghanistan-style chaos. Anders Fogh Rasmussen, the NATO chief, said on Tuesday that the  alliance would like to see the United Nations assume the leading role  in Libya's transition to democracy in the event Gaddafi leaves power. Speaking in Russia's second-largest city, Saint Petersburg, Rasmussen  said, 'To accommodate the legitimate aspirations of the Libyan  people, it is necessary that Gaddafi leaves power. ''After that, it is necessary to ensure a transition to democracy. . .   We want the United Nations to take the lead in this effort,' he said. One of the new elements in the road map agreed by the African Union  on Friday includes provisions for a multinational peacekeeping force  organised by the United Nations. Rasmussen is to meet Libyan opposition members in Brussels next week,  an alliance diplomat said Tuesday, the anti-Gaddafi contingent's  first invitation to NATO headquarters. *Published under an agreement with Al-Jazeera. 