Two days before celebrating the independence of South Sudan in  Juba, senior U. S.  officials warned Thursday that unresolved  issues between the new country and Khartoum, as well as  ongoing conflicts along or near their common border, threaten  the stability of both states. In particular, the failure by Khartoum and Juba to resolve the status  of Abyei and the allocation of oil revenues between the two capitals,  as well as the escalating violence in Southern Kordofan and Blue Nile  states, are causing growing concern here. 'This is a fragile and fraught moment,' noted Washington's ambassador  to the United Nations, Susan Rice, who will head a high-powered U. S.   delegation to mark the creation of the world's 195th nation in Juba  Saturday. 'It cannot and must not be taken for granted, least of all by the  government of Sudan and the government of the Republic of South  Sudan, who will have to still work exceptionally hard to achieve an  enduring peace and enable the emergence of two viable states that are  peaceful neighbours,' she noted. Briefing reporters before embarking for the 16-hour flight to Juba,  Rice and other U. S.  officials, also stressed that Washington will not  remove Khartoum from the State Department's terrorism list until all  provisions of the 2005 Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA), which set  the South's independence in motion, are fulfilled. As a result, Khartoum, which was praised by Washington for  cooperating with the January plebiscite in which the southern  population voted overwhelmingly for independence, will likely  continue to be denied funding from key multilateral institutions,  such as the World Bank, in which the U. S.  exercises major influence. 'What we will see Saturday with the independence of South Sudan is  only one element of the full implementation of (the CPA),' said  Assistant Secretary of State for African Affairs Johnnie Carson.  'As we have all mentioned, the issue of Abyei has not been resolved.   In fact, since May 19th, the situation on the ground became worse and  is only now returning to the status quo ante,' he said, adding, 'We  are working as hard as we can with the authorities in Khartoum to  make progress on these issues, but we are not yet at the end of the  line with respect to full implementation of the agreement. 'In addition to Rice and Carson, Washington's delegation to the  Saturday ceremonies will include the head of the U. S.  Africa Command  (AfriCom), Gen.  Carter Ham, and former Secretary of State Colin  Powell among other dignitaries. Powell's inclusion, in addition to ensuring the delegation's  bipartisanship, also serves as a reminder of the key role played by  the administration of President George W.  Bush, along with Britain  and Norway, in negotiating the CPA which effectively ended a 23-year  civil war in which an estimated two million people — most of them  southerners — died. That war pitted Khartoum and its mostly Muslim tribal auxiliaries  against the Sudan People's Liberation Army/Movement (SPLA/M), which  has governed the South since 2005. In the latter stages of the war, the SPLA/M received strong support  from U. S.  right-wing Christian organisations, in major part because,  unlike most of the rest of Sudan, the southern population is  predominantly Christian and animist.  Washington provided some 300  million dollars in aid to the South last year. As a core constituency of the Republican Party, the Christian Right  pressed Bush to make Sudan a top priority in his administration, and  the CPA is today considered one of his few major foreign policy  triumphs. In addition to granting the SPLA/M a governing role for an interim  period, the CPA established a process to enable southerners to vote  whether to secede six years after the agreement was signed.  It also  permitted the introduction of thousands of U. N.  peacekeepers (UNMIS)  to help maintain the ceasefire. In addition, the accord called for a referendum — also to take place  after six years — for the residents of Abyei, a disputed oil- producing region wedged between the north and south, to determine  whether they would join the north or the south and for less well- defined 'popular consultations' in Southern Kordofan and Blue Nile  states where the SPLA/M has long been present. While the Southern referendum went forward as scheduled, Abyei's has  yet to take place.  Moreover, northern troops forcibly occupied the  city of Abyei in May, provoking the exodus of some 100,000 residents,  most of whom have fled to the South.  While a ceasefire agreement was agreed in June that provided for the  withdrawal of Khartoum's forces, and their replacement by a new U. N.   force of some 4,000 Ethiopian troops, the refugees have not yet  returned to their homes, and the referendum appears to have been put  on ice. After demanding that all SPLA forces in Southern Khordofan and Blue  Nile states disarm, Khartoum last month also launched military  offensives, notably against Nuba communities that have long been  allied with the SPLM, in both states, creating new humanitarian  crises there. Moreover, Sudanese President Omar al-Bashir, who is under indictment  for war crimes by the International Criminal Court in connection with  the government's counterinsurgency campaign in Darfur, has demanded  that all UNMIS troops, including those deployed to Southern Khordofan  and Blue Nile states, leave the country Saturday when their mandate  expires. In her statement Thursday, Rice stressed that Washington was  'extremely concerned' by Bashir's decision.  'It's vital that the  United Nations be allowed to maintain a full peacekeeping presence in  these areas for an additional period of time in order to facilitate  the distribution of humanitarian aid, support the implementation of  any cessation of hostilities agreement, and vitally, to protect  civilians,' she said. She and Carson also stressed that Khartoum and Juba have still not  reached agreement on three key CPA provisions, including their  precise borders; how they will divide the revenues from the oil that  is located mainly in the south but pumped to Northern ports for  export; and how to determine the citizenship status of southerners  living in the North and northerners living in the South. 'We believe the parties need to urgently resolve these remaining  issues,' Rice said.  'Allowing these issues, including the final  status of Abyei, to linger without resolution for any length of time  could swiftly destabilise the future relationships between these two  states. '