With U. S.  and Western military forces planning to gradually  withdraw their troops from Iraq and Afghanistan, there will be  an increasing demand for private military contractors to  provide security in both politically-troubled countries. As a result, the number of military contractors is set to reach 5,500  in Iraq alone, according to a U. N.  Working Group on Mercenaries,  prompting demands for a specific international instrument to regulate  their activities. The members of the Working Group have stressed the importance of  establishing international guidelines and legislation when dealing  with Private Military and Security Companies (PMSCs). Three of the five members of the Working Group on Mercenaries held a  press conference Friday to discuss new legislation and the need for an  international instrument to regulate PMSCs. The Working Group has already submitted legislation on the subject, to  the General Assembly and the U. N.  Human Rights Council.  The issue is  settling on a set of regulations that countries will agree on in a  timely manner. Established in July 2005, the Working Group keeps track of mercenaries  and mercenary-related activities.  Its mandate is to make suggestions  to protect human rights in the face of such activities. José Luis Gómez del Prado, chair of the Working Group, spoke of  necessary change, and participation of member states. Currently, there is an International Convention against the  Recruitment, Use, Financing and Training of Mercenaries which came  into force in 2001.  This convention, however, was only ratified by 32  member states, few of which were Western. Asked why, Gómez del Prado told IPS, 'They don't find it a priority.   They could ratify quite easily. 'But he added that discussions were in place so that such nations might  'declare it a priority' even if the government has limited involvement  with mercenaries. The difference between the new legislation and the convention against  mercenaries is that mercenaries - individuals hired to fight for pay -  are criminals while PMSCs are legal organisations hired by governments  and non-governmental organisations (NGOs) to perform myriad services. 'It's more efficient for short-term projects.  For one-month, two- month, three-month jobs, governments are not going to set up full  agencies.  The problem is the lack of control,' Gómez del Prado told  IPS, highlighting the allure of PMSC use. Similarly, the need for PMSC involvement will increase significantly  in Iraq by the end of this year, when U. S.  troops are scheduled to  exit the country.  These private contractors, however, will not leave  Iraq in the near future.  Otherwise, the Working Group assured, victims would not receive the  justice they deserve.  This is supported by a case still pending in  United States courts, where contractors working for Blackwater  allegedly killed 17 civilians and injured another 20 in Nissour  Square, four years ago. Many countries, however, are not supportive of an international  instrument and instead seek a self-regulatory instrument.  This would  allow companies to control themselves, based on a voluntary code of  conduct. According to Alexander Nikitin, a member of the Working Group, 'The  issue is not to prohibit PMSCs' but to 'draw a red line' between what  is allowed and what is prohibited.  Countries may not agree with such legislation for purely economic  reasons.  Nikitin told IPS, 'Contradictions are not always political,  they are yet on the level of business - of private sector.  Soon they  may be political'. Amada Benavides de Perez, a member of the Working Group, stressed how  PMSCs are draining projects of their funding, explaining that though  3. 2 million dollars was given to fight drug trafficking two weeks ago,  57 percent of that money was put towards hiring PMSCs. She urged governments and NGOs to ask, 'What does the money actually  go to?'Many countries, Nikitin told IPS, 'have a vested economic interest' in  PMSCs and even mercenaries.  Because of this, they may be unwilling to  support legislature that confines the rights of PMSCs. Hesitation may also rest on the issue of control. 'States want entry control,' Nikitin added.  As an example, he  explained how an oil company may hire a guard, but that particular  person may not be allowed in the country of operation.  In such cases,  Nikitin told IPS 'countries want rights to expel the company, or the  worker'. As an example of such control issues, Gómez del Prado cited an  incident involving a general in the British Army who was discharged  due to psychological issues, but wanted to go back to Iraq. According to Gómez del Prado, the general applied to be a mercenary  and was passed without a background check.  Some 38 hours later, he had  killed two civilians and injured another. To avoid tragic incidents such as this, he said there is a pressing  need for an international instrument spelling out self-regulation and  codes of conduct. The binding instrument would include means of licensing and monitoring  activities as well as laws to regulate them.  Regulation would occur on  both national and international levels. 