As South Sudan was admitted as the 193rd member of the United  Nations on Thursday, officials in Washington said the hard  work in the fragile new country has just begun. '[The U. S. ] has stood with the peoples of Sudan throughout these  struggles. . . and we must remain involved until there is lasting peace  in the region,' U. S.  Senator John Kerry said at a special Senate  Foreign Relations Committee hearing here Thursday. 'We should recognise that while only one country is joining the  community of nations, the reality is that two nations emerged on Jan.   9: the newly independent south and a greatly changed north,' he  added.  'Both of these nations are fragile, and they will remain that  way until they reach an agreement that allows them to live separately  but work together. 'Ambassador Princeton Lyman, U. S.  Special Envoy to Sudan, said at the  hearing that the U. S.  is prepared to help the newly separated Sudan  face its uncertain economic future, as it will be forced to adjust to  a significant loss of oil revenue and will need debt relief, access  to resources and a sustainable climate for private investment - but  only on the condition that it fulfills its obligations under the 2005  Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA). 'It depends on their behaviour and what happens these next weeks and  months in terms of accountability,' Lyman added, pointing out that  the U. S.  has already taken initial steps to normalise bilateral  relations but will not move forward without a demonstrated commitment  from the north. 'It's not a matter of dictation,' Lyman said.  'It's a matter of  living up to international standards and [Sudan's] own promises.  So  this is going to be a critical component of their own ability to  succeed. 'President Omar al-Bashir raised hopes for such an agreement earlier  this week by indicating that Sudan would stabilise and develop the  Blue Nile and Southern Kordofan states. But some human rights groups contend that the reality on the ground  paints a less hopeful picture. The hearing, called to address the most pressing challenges facing  South Sudan, fell on the same day that the Satellite Sentinel Project  (SSP), a United States-based satellite monitoring group, released a  report with images alleged to be evidence of mass graves in Sudan's  Southern Kordofan state.  The advocacy group claims that photographs of three dug-up sites are  consistent with mass graves and thus evidence of systematic murder,  which may support accusations by human rights groups that the North's  military has targeted the ethnic Nuba peoples in the border region. 'The three excavated areas positively identified by imagery analysis,  independent of eye-witness reports, corroborate allegations by two  eyewitnesses of potential mass graves south of the Tilo School in  Kadugli,' stated the report.  Concerns from international human rights groups over a potential  humanitarian crisis unfolding in the region - where some 100,000  civilians have been displaced from their homes, according to the U. N.   - have delayed negotiations over the contentious status of Abyei,  which sits at the heart of the conflict.  The international community fixed an eye on the region as a breeding  ground for human rights atrocities after the north's Sudanese Armed  Forces (SAF) forcefully annexed the oil-rich area in May and violence  intensified when the south's Sudan People Liberation's Army (SPLA)  deployed retaliatory troops in June.  'Our timetable got derailed by the military takeover of Abyei.  [Now],  we need to make sure that Abyei is demilitarised and the people feel  safe and then we can deal with this issue, so it has been delayed and  I'm bothered by it, 'Lyman said. 'I think we ought to have a very firm timetable for addressing [the  status of Abyei] because otherwise it just lingers as a source of  conflict,' he added. To date, as the vicious border conflicts in the area proceed, with  the U. N.  humanitarian office reporting SAF-launched aerial  bombardments of SPLA areas this week, they threaten to unravel any  semblance of stability accorded by the CPA. In the wake of celebrations over South Sudan's successful January  referendum and transition toward independence, the U. S.  has urged  both al-Bashir and Salva Kiir, President of South Sudan, to quickly  return to the negotiating table and settle unfinished business in the  completion of the CPA. Along with Abyei's uncertain status, several other critical issues -  namely, the establishment of mutually-beneficial arrangements  regarding oil revenues, citizenship status and a method for securing  peace along their shared border - were, according to the CPA, to be  negotiated by Jul.  9, but today remain unresolved. 'How these outstanding issues are managed over the near term will  define the future relationship between Sudan and South Sudan,' Lyman  said.  'Allowing these issues to linger without resolution for too  long could destabilise the future relationships between [the two  nations]. '