A new documentary showing graphic footage from the end of Sri  Lanka's war against the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam  (LTTE) in 2009 refuels calls for an investigation into war  crimes and crimes against humanity. 'Sri Lanka's Killing Fields', screened at the U. S.  Capitol Friday, is  'a gruesome example of humanity at its worst', said lawmaker James  McGovern, co-chair of the House of Representatives' Tom Lantos Human  Rights Commission, who introduced the film.  Directed by filmmaker and journalist Callum Macrae, the British  documentary presents eyewitness testimony and harrowing footage of  atrocities committed against civilians by both the Sri Lankan Armed  Forces and the LTTE between January and May 2009 in an increasingly  small area in northeastern Sri Lanka, where the LTTE, better known as  the Tamil Tigers, had fought a brutal war of independence since 1983. In order to wipe out the insurgency, Sri Lanka launched an all-out  offensive against the Tamil Tigers two and-a-half years ago.  It  decisively beat the LTTE but exacted a heavy toll on the minority  Tamil population, spurring calls for an investigation. The 50-minute documentary, which first aired on British television  Channel 4 in June, was sponsored by Human Rights Watch (HRW), Amnesty  International, the International Crisis Group (ICG), and the Open  Society Foundation.  It was also shown in Geneva and the United  Nations in New York. Verified by the United Nations as authentic, the film's footage was  captured on camera and mobile phones by civilians, Sir Lankan  soldiers, and Tamil insurgents.  It is rough, and difficult to watch. Indeed, in one scene, camera footage shows the aftermath of the  army's shelling of a hospital: bodies parts are strewn everywhere and  'you can see blood from the dead bodies flowing with the rain water,'  according to an eyewitness. A U. N.  Panel of Experts report from April 2011 on the Sri Lankan war  found that the army's military campaign relied heavily on shelling,  including in the so-called no-fly zones, which led to the deaths of  upwards of 40,000 civilians.  Eyewitnesses and human rights organisations allege that the army  intentionally targeted civilian locales, including hospitals and food  distribution lines. In another heart-wrenching scene, footage shows young girls crying  out from a bunker to their mother, who lies bleeding just several  feet away.  The documentary explains that a second round of shelling,  which eyewitnesses say was intended to kill civilians who came to the  aid of the wounded, prevented the girls from reaching their dying  mother.  Other footage shows soldiers summarily executing prisoners, and dead  women who appeared to have been sexually assaulted. But the atrocities, which the U. N.  and human rights groups say may  amount to war crimes and crimes against humanity, was not limited to  the army. 'Sri Lanka's Killing Fields' also shows aerial footage of LTTE  soldiers shooting at a crowd of civilians.  The U. N.  has found credible allegations that the Tamil Tigers used  civilians as shields and killed those who tried to escape, in  addition to committing other crimes. 'These scenes provide much more than simply shock value. . .  They also  are powerful evidence of the need for an independent investigation to  hold those responsible accountable for the crimes,' said McGovern. 'If the Sri Lankan government is unable or unwilling to act, then the  international community must respond in its place,' he added. Following the screening on Friday, a panel of experts from the human  rights groups that sponsored the film discussed efforts to hold the  Sri Lankan government responsible, the recent U. N.  report, and the  U. S. 's response to these developments. Mark Schneider, the vice president of the ICG, criticised the Sri  Lankan government's inquiry into the conflict, called the Lessons  Learnt and Reconciliation Commission, as flawed and failing to meet  international standards for effective accountability.  'The question of how do you move beyond — to the future, if you will  — depends on, in [the ICG's] view, full, adequate reconciliation  based on full, adequate accountability,' he said. 'This has not occurred, it isn't occurring and it should be the  objective of all those who seek a future of progress and development  in Sri Lanka in which all of the ethnic groups in the country  participate without fear, without discrimination, and with full  access to the democratic process,' he said. Tom Malinowski, the Washington director of HRW, spoke about the  strategic argument for holding Sri Lanka accountable, in addition to  the obvious moral one. In contrast to the U. S.  counterinsurgency strategy of separating  civilians from militants and targeting only the latter, 'the Sri  Lankan government gambled on a different strategy. . .  that in order to  wipe out the insurgency, you have to use overwhelming lethal force  [including against civilians] while kicking out all of the  journalists and international observers,' he said. 'If you do that, you'll be criticised, have resolutions passed  against you, but it doesn't matter because you're going to win and  when you win, you can rewrite the history. 'It is profoundly not in America's interest to allow this model to  stand,' Malinowski emphasised. He also contrasted the international community's response to Muammar  al-Gaddafi's possible slaughter of civilians in Benghazi to the  inaction on Sri Lanka.  'We established a no-fly zone over Libya to prevent from happening  there exactly what happened in Sri Lanka,' he said.  'Now I'm not saying we should [follow suit in Sri Lanka] but the  least we can do is let the survivors know we know what happened, and  it matters to us to hold those responsible accountable,' he said. 