When weeklong negotiations on the control and regulation of  the global arms trade were concluded last week, there was one  missing link in the proposed treaty: riot control equipment  used recently against peaceful demonstrators in the streets of  Egypt, Libya, Bahrain, Syria, Yemen and Jordan. The Arms Trade Treaty, which is expected to be finalised and signed  next year, is either ambiguous or excludes 'weapons of repression',  including rubber bullets, water cannons, tear gas canisters, and high  voltage electric-shock stun guns. Described as combat protective equipment, these weapons are used not  only by national armed forces but also by law enforcement agencies,  including the police and prison services. The London-based Amnesty International (AI) warned that if certain  types of security and police equipment such as non-military firearms,  including riot guns, crowd control vehicles, shotgun ammunition and  tear gas, are not clearly covered by the ATT, 'many governments will  not prevent such arms being supplied and used for serious violations  of human rights'.  Jeff Abramson, coordinator of the Control Arms Secretariat, a global  civil society coalition, told IPS the last draft of the chairman's  text will need to be transformed into treaty language, but the  precise process as to how that will happen is still unclear. 'There could be both improvements and backsliding as that happens,'  he said. Members of the Control Arms coalition will be working hard to see  that improvements occur on what is generally a positive paper now, he  added. 'Those areas for improvement include inclusion of police and crowd  control equipment, the same items that are often used to commit the  abuses for which a robust Arms Trade Treaty would work to stop,'  noted Abramson. Currently, there are no comprehensive or binding international rules  or treaties governing the international trade in conventional  weapons.  Gaps and loopholes in national controls allow weapons and  armaments to end up in the hands of serious human rights abusers.  In a statement released Friday, AI pointed out the recent repression  in the Middle East and North Africa demonstrates that a wide range of  arms used by military, security and police forces must be covered  under the scope of the ATT. The international community has widely recognised that conventional  weapons, munitions and armaments are often used for internal  repression as well as armed conflict, most recently by imposing arms  embargoes against certain governments in the Middle East.  AI said it has identified U. S. -made tear gas canisters and solid  rubber bullets, and French tear gas grenades and solid rubber  dispersion grenades in the aftermath of the attacks on civilian  demonstrators in the streets of Bahrain early this year. In Egypt, the extensive use of a lethal type of shotgun ammunition by  security forces resulted in many fatalities.  In Libya, AI said, UK-made vehicles were used by security forces, and  in Egypt security forces drove into protestors using armoured  vehicles.  The main arms suppliers to Bahrain, Egypt and Libya have been  Belgium, the Czech Republic, France, Germany, Italy, Slovakia, the UK  and the United States, according to AI.  'The recent events in Bahrain, Libya, Egypt and elsewhere have shown  how a wide range of conventional military and security equipment can  be persistently misused for unlawful force often with lethal  consequences,' AI said. Abramson of the Control Arms coalition told IPS the ATT must have a  broad scope that includes all weapons and all deals. He said other critical areas of improvement include text that  requires public reporting, as well as cooperation with relevant  international and regional organisations and nongovernmental  organisations (NGOs). 'The treaty must work to improve transparency into what is now an  opaque process of loophole-ridden arms dealing that allows  irresponsible and illicit trade to flourish,' he said. All these improvements are doable and can be achieved if states  remain focused, hardworking and proactive in the coming year,  Abramson declared. Asked about the next meeting aimed at finalising the treaty, Abramson  said 'this is not 100 percent clear right now'. He said there will be another meeting in February, which was  originally intended to be a mostly procedural one and lasting less  than a week.  One of the topics that will likely be determined is the  means and manner of civil society participation for the upcoming  summer negotiating conference, 'an issue we feel is very important'. That meeting may now be extended to a full week and include some of  the same content as past meetings. 'We're waiting to see how this is finalised,' said Abramson. The four-week conference, scheduled to take place next summer, is  billed as the biggest event in the U. N.  ATT process. The expectation is that it will be held in July, but it's possible  that it may start in mid-late June. 'We're again waiting to see final dates,' said Abramson. 