The most pressing global challenge to children's rights may be  the increasing number of military attacks on schools in war  zones, according to a Human Rights Watch report released  Wednesday. 'It's an issue that we now want to get more attention to  internationally, so that we can sort of stigmatise the issue, and try  and protect the schools and those who go to schools,' Bede Sheppard,  a senior researcher in Human Rights Watch's Children's Rights  Division, told IPS. The report, 'Schools and Armed Conflict: A Global Survey of Domestic  Laws and State Practice Protecting Schools from Attack and Military  Use', details domestic regulations regarding education and conflict  in 56 countries.  It examines three areas of legislation: protecting civilian objects  (including buildings and infrastructure), protecting educational  buildings, and preventing educational facilities from being used by  armed groups — whether government security forces or non-state  militias. It also documents the long-run impacts of such attacks on schools,  ranging from imperiling the lives of students and staff, to exposing  students to physical and verbal abuse from troops, to causing  psychological effects like trauma, anxiety, and despondency.  'It's much more than just a destroyed building,' Sheppard told IPS,  'it's also an attack on children's right to education. 'Other impacts, according to Sheppard, include increased drop-out  rates, decreased chances of students graduating to higher grades, and  frequent relocations to new sites that may be further away and less  easily accessible. 'So that can have a real impact on the whole generation,' he said. UNICEF's Jordan Naidoo, a senior education advisor and head of the  Education in Emergencies programme, agreed.  'Education is supposed to be a means to bring people together to  build community,' he told IPS.  'But with the conflict going on, it  can lead to disjunctures. 'The U. S.  children's agency UNICEF is partnering with Human Rights  Watch to form a coalition called 'Protecting Education from Attack',  and, according to Naidoo, planning a round table on the subject to be  held in the next year. 'Schools in many of these countries are the centre of the community,'  Naidoo said.  'So also that is a loss — not just to the children who  attend, but to the entire community. 'The military use of and attacks on schools also have grave impacts on  the education systems as a whole, Naidoo said, noting the economic  costs of rebuilding facilities. 'Education… is foundational to many of the other development goals.   So if education is disrupted through conflict, it has kind of  dynamic, multiple effects over the long term,' he said.  'It's really  damaging to the country at various levels,' he added. As for the motivation behind such attacks, the experts do not want to  generalise. 'There are different motivations for armed groups to attack schools  in different conflicts,' explained Sheppard. 'It's really important to do investigations as to what those reasons  are, because you need to tailor your responses to addressing what's  causing those attacks,' he said. He noted, for example, the ethnically Malay Muslims in Thailand who  attack in defiance of the ethnically Thai Buddhist government.   'They're targeting the schools because they see the schools as a site  of indoctrination by the government,' he said. In India, Maoists simply find schools an easy target for attack —  usually unprotected at night and sure to bring in lots of publicity. Naidoo offered another motivation.  'In some instances… the schools  represent stability,' he said.  'They may be a part of the  establishment, so they may be attacked for that reason. 'Non-governmental organisations can play an important role in  reversing the damage when conflicts disrupt education.  They can act  as interlocutors, negotiating the armed factions, and provide  emergency education to displaced children, according to Sheppard. In that vein, UNICEF works on the ground both during and in the  aftermath of armed conflicts.  'We recognise that education often provides a safe haven for children  affected by conflict,' Naidoo explained.  'Education provides relief  from trauma and other… psycho-social effects that children have to  face. ' The Education in Emergencies programme also trains teachers to help  students deal with the trauma of conflict and natural disasters.  The report notes that, often in situations of instability, schools  become centres for life-saving information like mine-awareness.   Education also ensures the future development and security of a  country, the report said. 'If we do not work directly with communities, with the government,  and with schools, the disruption can continue even after the  cessation of the armed conflict,' explained Naidoo. Looking forward, the report recommends that all countries criminalise  intentional attacks on educational facilities and that they consider  enacting legislation to prohibit the use of schools as army bases.  It also recommends including school protection in military training  materials and ensuring that all violators of international  protections are appropriately disciplined or prosecuted. 'It's also important that the government takes responsibility after  an attack to rebuild that school quickly, to try and minimise the  disruptions,' Sheppard added. The good news, he said, is that some countries faced with serious  conflicts have stepped up as leaders and implemented protections  against the military use of schools.  'The fact that countries like the Philippines and Colombia have said  that it's okay and possible to fight wars without using schools by  military forces — I think that's a great message to other countries,'  he said. And, according to Naidoo, this kind of regulation is essential for a  nation's greater advancement.  'Protecting children, schools, and  personnel is really important because it is at a cost to the overall  development of the country,' he said. 