The work of the International Criminal Court (ICC), the  world's first and only permanent court that pursues war  criminals, is likely to be hampered by a shortage of funds  next year. If the court does not get the necessary funding, due primarily to  proposed 'zero growth' in its budget, at least six active  investigations in the Central African Republic, the Democratic  Republic of Congo, Sudan, Uganda, Kenya and Libya could be affected. In an interview with IPS, the president of the Assembly of States  Parties and permanent representative of Liechtenstein to the U. N. ,  Christian Wenaweser, spoke about the troubles in the formulation of  the budget for 2012. 'Part of the difficulty stems from the extremely high costs arising  from the situations referred by the Security Council to the Court,'  he said. Currently, the ICC's member states bear the entire financial burden  of its mandate, something that was not foreseen by the drafters of  the Rome Statute, which created the ICC. 'The time has come for the United Nations to pay for the  investigations it refers to the court,' he added. According to the Coalition for ICC and Amnesty International, the  budget for 2011 was 149 million dollars.  A 'zero growth' budget in  2012 could affect the six active investigations, they warn. The ICC is financed by its 116 member states, using the scale adopted  by the United Nations for its regular budget, so that the main  contributors are Japan, Germany and the UK.  The United States is not  a contributor of the ICC because is not a signatory of the Rome  Statute. Once presented by the ICC, the Committee on Budget and Finance makes  recommendations to the Assembly of States Parties and the countries  approve the funds for the next year. Excerpts from the interview with Ambassador Wenaweser follow. Q: Who are the major funders of the ICC budget?  A: The ICC has essentially the same scale of assessments as the  United Nations.  Consequently, those ICC States Parties that are the  greatest contributors to the United Nations are also the major  funders of the ICC budget.  Japan, Germany, the United Kingdom,  France, Italy, Canada, Spain, Mexico, the Republic of Korea and  Australia are the top 10 States Parties in this respect. Q: How does the ICC punish delays in contributions by the States  Parties?  A: At the last session of the Assembly of States Parties, a small  number of countries had arrears amounting to two years of  contributions.  As in the United Nations General Assembly, such  countries lose their right to vote in the Assembly, but they may  apply for an exception to that rule if the inability to pay is beyond  their control, as may be the case for least developed countries. For substantial delays of less than two years, however, there are no  such clear sanctions.  Overall, however, States Parties do actually  make their payments in a rather responsible manner. Q: How does the Contingency Fund work?  A: The Contingency Fund was established in 2004 to help the Court  deal with unforeseen expenses, in particular since judicial  activities are extremely difficult to forecast in a budget planning  process.  The Court must notify States Parties of its intention to tap  into the Fund, and it may only do so where it has actually run out of  money under its approved budget. Due to the Security Council referral of the situation in Libya, the  Court has already concluded that it will have to make use of the  Fund.  There is a legal requirement that the resources available in  the Fund should not fall below 7 million euros (about 10 million  dollars).  Due to a number of unforeseen funding requirements, the  fund would thus have to be replenished. Q: The ICC is working in six different cases and there is the chance  of a new investigation in Cote d'Ivoire.  Do you think the ICC will  need to increase its budget for 2012?  A: At this stage in the budget planning process, it is up to the  Court to make this assessment.  Currently the Court assumes it will  need an increase of 13 percent.  At the next phase, the Committee on  Budget and Finance (CBF) will subject this budget proposal to close  scrutiny, before States make the final decision at the December  session of the Assembly. Q: The convenor of the Coalition for the ICC, William Pace, said that  France and the UK were demanding 'zero growth' budget for 2012, even  though they were among the nations that asked the ICC to probe  Libya's regime.  What can you say about it?  A: States Parties will have to embark on difficult budget  negotiations in December 2011.  I would therefore prefer not to  comment on the positions of individual States Parties. Q: In any case, do you think a 'zero growth' budget could compromise  the activities of the ICC?  A: I believe that it is the duty of States Parties to see that the  Court's activities must be properly funded.  That said, I also think  that the budgetary reality of States Parties must be taken into  account and the Court must find ways to make savings.  As always, a  compromise must be struck, one that takes into account the needs of  the Court and the abilities of States Parties. Part of the difficulty stems from the extremely high costs arising  from the situations referred by the Security Council to the Court.   Currently, the ICC's States Parties bear the entire financial burden  of these situations, something that was not foreseen by the drafters  of the Rome Statute.  The time has come for the United Nations to pay  for the investigations it refers to the Court. Q: How can the U. N.  pay for these investigations if it also depends  on a limited budget from member states?  A: The money would in the end of course come from U. N.  member states,  not from the U. N.  as such, and there is already much overlap in the  list of the biggest contributors of both organisations.  The U. N.   General Assembly would have to take a specific decision regarding the  full or partial reimbursement of these costs, which would then be  binding on all U. N.  Member States.  Such arrangements are already  foreseen in the Relationship Agreement between the United Nations and  the ICC. 