Wealthy Pakistanis from the country’s northwestern region are leaving their  hometowns permanently to settle in safer areas far from the war zone.  Doctors  and other professionals are joining the exodus. The departure of doctors and other medical personnel could put the fragile health care system in  danger but many have found the situation too risky for them and their families.  Dr Zararullah Mahsud had a thriving medical practice in the tribal area of South Waziristan but left his  ancestral village for Peshawar in December 2009.  'My decision to leave my hometown permanently is based on the bitter experience of living there,' said  Mahsud, who runs a clinic near Board Bazaar in Peshawar.  'The past five years were like hell.  My  children stayed at home instead of going to school and there was no chance for them to play. 'Mahsud’s brothers and cousins have also moved their families to safer cities to avoid violence.  'It is very  hard to leave your birthplace permanently but sometimes you have to safeguard yourself and the  younger generation. 'It is not just the residents of South Waziristan and other districts of the Federally Administered Tribal  Areas (FATA) who are leaving, but also wealthier families from Peshawar and other cities in the  neighbouring province of Khyber Pakhtunkhwa. 'My family is living in Islamabad now.  I am staying here to run my private hospital,' Dr Muhibur  Rehman, who was kidnapped by the Taliban last year, told IPS.  He remained in Taliban captivity for a  month and reportedly paid a ransom of 25,000 dollars for his freedom. Another senior surgeon, who asked to be unnamed, said he moved to Lahore to live with his sons after  he received threats from Taliban. 'The Taliban warned me to send them 5,000 dollars every month, which was beyond by financial  position,' the surgeon told IPS.  'So, the only option to avoid the Taliban’s wrath was to leave my native  city forever….  I have sold all my property and would never come back as I know that the Taliban have  now become a permanent feature of life in Khyber Pakhtunkhwa. 'Pakistan was peaceful before the Taliban was ousted from power in Afghanistan in late 2001 and took  sanctuary in the FATA near the Pakistan-Afghanistan border.  The Taliban then spread out from the  tribal areas, launching attacks in Khyber Pakhtunkhwa and other parts of the country. At the receiving end of those attacks are the six million people living in FATA, which consists of seven  tribal agencies now dubbed as the international headquarters of Al-Qaeda and the Taliban.  In six of the  seven tribal agencies, the army has been engaged in operations against militants since 2005, making  life extremely difficult. Residents seeking peace have incurred the ire of militants, as in the case of 55-year-old Abdullah Khan  whose family hails from Orakzai Agency.  He said they had formed a peace committee, angering the  local chapter of the outlawed Tehrik-e-Taliban Pakistan (TTP), who warned them to dismantle the  committee. 'We didn’t heed the Taliban’s warning.  One night they attacked us and killed my two younger brothers,'  said Khan, whose family has moved to the capital Islamabad.  He added they were forced to sell their  property in Orakzai, valued at one million dollars, for only a fifth of what it was worth so that they could  buy a small house in Islamabad. 'The real estate dealers have been earning exorbitant amounts buying houses for people displaced from  the FATA by military operations,' said Abid Shah, vice-president of the Real Estate Dealers Association  in Peshawar. Muhammad Omar, an established businessman from Bajaur Agency, still regrets selling his agricultural  land for much lower than the market price due to the worsening militancy back home.  'I have done a  great blunder to sell my shops and property because one day we have to return there.  But I sold the  property on the insistence of my family,' he told IPS.  'Now there is no option of going back there because I have sold everything,' he said. Some one million people who have fled the violence in northwest Pakistan now live in camps or with  relatives or in rented houses.  'The wealthier ones opt to migrate to other places to be safe,' said  Mukhtar Khan, a college teacher in Mohmand Agency, who purchased a house in Peshawar last year. 'We have been temporarily migrating from Mohmand to Peshawar and then back to Mohmand from the  past five years, which has adversely affected the education of my children,' he said.  Still, he said his  family visit relatives on special occasions but cannot afford to stay there permanently. The section of the FATA located along the 2,400-km porous Pakistan-Afghan border is the least  developed part of the country.  Those who opt to stay live under the shadow of militants who often  inflict harsh punishment that includes public executions and chopping off hands. 'The people have lost confidence in the military as well as the government and they don’t see any  prospects of peace there.  Only poor families are staying there,' said Hashimullah Afridi, a cloth  merchant from Khyber Agency where the military operation has been going on for the past two years.   