The Taliban leadership is ready to negotiate peace with the  United States right now if Washington indicates its  willingness to provide a timetable for complete withdrawal,  according to a former Afghan prime minister who set up a  secret meeting between a senior Taliban official and a U. S.   general two years ago. They also have no problem with meeting the oft-repeated U. S.  demand  that the Taliban cut ties completely with Al-Qaeda.  Ahmad Shah Ahmadzai, who was acting prime minister of Afghanistan in  1995-96, told IPS in an interview that a group of Taliban officials  conveyed the organisation's position on starting peace negotiations  to him in a meeting in Kabul a few days ago.  'They said once the Americans say 'we are ready to withdraw', they  will sit with them,' said Ahmadzai.  The former prime minister said Taliban officials made it clear that  they were not insisting on any specific date for final withdrawal.   'The timetable is up to the Americans,' he said.  Ahmadzai contradicted a favourite theme of media coverage of the  issue of peace negotiations on the war - that Mullah Mohammed Omar,  head of the Taliban leadership council, has not been on board with  contacts by Taliban officials with the administration of Afghan  President Hamid Karzai and the U. S.  He confirmed that Mullah Baradar, then second in command to Mullah  Omar, had indeed had high-level contacts with officials in the Karzai  government in 2009, as claimed by Karzai aides, before being detained  by Pakistani intelligence in early 2010.  And contrary to speculation that Baradar's relationship with Mullah  Omar had been terminated either by those contacts or by his  detention, Ahmadzai said, 'Baradar is still the top man,' and 'Mullah  Omar's position on him hasn't changed. ' Ahmadzai, who studied engineering at Colorado State University before  joining the U. S. -sponsored mujahideen fighting the Soviets in  Afghanistan, maintains close ties with Quetta Shura officials but has  also enjoyed personal contacts with the U. S.  military.  He brokered a  meeting between a senior Taliban leader and Brig.  Gen.  Edward M.   Reeder, then commander of the Combined Special Forces Special  Operations Army Component Command in Kabul in summer 2009. The former prime minister's account of that meeting in the interview  with IPS further documents the Taliban leadership's interest in  entering into peace negotiations with the United States prior to the  Barack Obama administration's decision to escalate U. S.  military  involvement sharply in 2009.  A senior Taliban leader told Reeder at the meeting that the  insurgents had no problem with severing their ties to Al-Qaeda, but  could not agree to U. S.  demands for access to military bases.  Ahmadzai said he negotiated the meeting with the Taliban leadership  in the spring of 2009, at the request of Reeder, who had just arrived  in Kabul a few weeks earlier.  The process took four months, he  recalled, because the Taliban leadership had so many questions that  had to be addressed. The main question, of course, was what arrangements would be made for  the Taliban representative's safety.  In the end, the International  Security Assistance Force (ISAF) command facilitated the Taliban  representative's travel into Kabul, Ahmadzai recalled. The Taliban official who met with Reeder and Ahmadzai in Kabul was a  member of the Taliban Quetta Shura (leadership council) who called  himself Mullah Min Mohammed for security reasons, according to  Ahmadzai.  The Quetta Shura representative complained to Reeder about the  failure of the United States to follow up on a previous contact with  a senior Taliban representative, according to Ahmadzai's account. 'Mullah Mohammed' recalled to Reeder that the Taliban had met two  years earlier in southern Kandahar province with an unnamed U. S.   official who had made two demands as the price for U. S.  withdrawal  from Afghanistan: an end to the Taliban's relations with Al-Qaeda and  U. S.  long-term access to three airbases in the country.  'We agreed to one but not to the other,' the senior Taliban official  was quoted by Ahmadzai as saying.  The Taliban leader explained that it had no trouble with the demand  for cutting ties with Al-Qaeda, but that it would not agree to the  U. S.  retaining any military bases in Afghanistan — 'not one metre',  according to Ahmadzai's account. The Quetta Shura representative then reproached the U. S.  for having  failed to make any response to the Taliban offer to cut the  organisation's ties with Al-Qaeda.  'You haven't responded to us,' he is said to have told Reeder.  'You  never told us yes or no. ' The Taliban complaint suggested that the Quetta Shura leadership had  been prepared to move into more substantive talks if the U. S.  had  indicated its interest in doing so.  Reeder, who has been commander of the U. S.  Army Special Forces  Command at Fort Bragg since July 2010, did not respond to an e-mail  from IPS to the command's Public Affairs Office for comment on  Ahmadzai's account of the meeting. After the announcement of the major increase in troop deployment in  Afghanistan, the Obama administration adopted a public posture that  suggested the Taliban leadership had no reason to negotiate unless  put under severe military pressure.  In light of the contacts between senior Taliban leaders and U. S.   officials in 2007 and 2009, the Taliban clearly concluded that the  United States would not negotiate on terms it could accept, and the  meeting between Reeder and the Taliban leader indicated that the  Taliban were no longer interested in negotiations with Washington. Despite the apparent policy shift against seeking peace talks, the  Taliban continued to signal to Washington that it was willing to  exclude any presence for Al-Qaeda or other groups that might target  the United States from Afghan territory.  Mullah Omar suggested that willingness in an unusual statement on the  occasion of the Islamic holiday Eid in September 2009.  Then in early December, the Islamic Emirate of Afghanistan — the  official title adopted by the Quetta Shura leadership for its  political-military organisation — said in a statement posted on its  website and circulated to Western news agencies that it was prepared  to offer 'formal guarantees' against any aggressive actions against  other countries from its soil as part of a settlement with the United  States.  *Gareth Porter is an investigative historian and journalist  specialising in U. S.  national security policy.  The paperback edition  of his latest book, 'Perils of Dominance: Imbalance of Power and the  Road to War in Vietnam', was published in 2006. 