Witnesses' chilling depictions of a new Sudanese genocide at  an emergency congressional hearing Thursday quelled any  remnants of doubt that a humanitarian crisis is unfolding in  the Nuba mountain region of South Kordofan. 'It is a war of horror,' Sudanese bishop Andudu Adam Elnail told a  House committee here about the systemised ethnic cleansing of the  formerly southern allied Nuba people - now the targets of violence in  the ethnically divided northern state of South Kordofan. 'Nuba people are fearing,' Elnail said.  'They don't know what is  going to happen.  They feel they're forgotten because nothing is going  there tangible to rescue them and give them the freedom. 'Elnail's closest colleagues had told him they witnessed two pits  being dug at a school one night, where bodies were later transported  to the site, put in 'wide body bags' and thrown in the pits -  something to add to the heap of evidence piling up in Washington that  a decades-old campaign to exterminate the ethnic Nuba has resumed in  the wake of the south's independence. Elnail added his own accounts of bombs dropping from the sky daily on  civilian towns, military forces shelling and burning his  neighbourhood — including his own house - and people running to the  mountains to hide in caves where they have nothing but 'greens' to  eat.   'There is more than enough evidence to justify speedy action on the  part of the United States government and the international community  to address this very dire situation in the Nuba Mountains,' Phillips  said. 'It's absolutely essential that the international community bring  pressure to bear on the United Nations to immediately declare a  humanitarian emergency in the Nuba Mountains and impose a no-fly zone  to stop the bombing campaign and allow humanitarian access so that  relief flights back into the region may resume,' he added. Recent accounts that signal ethnic cleansing in Sudan's border region  are inextricably linked to a complex history of violence, stemming  from a decades-long intensive military campaign spearheaded by the  National Islamic Front (NIF) to Islamise the African indigenous  populations in Southern Sudan, the Blue Nile and the Nuba Mountains  region of Southern Kordofan state. The Nuba allied with the Sudanese People's Liberation Movement  (SPLM), the primary force resisting the NIF and today, southern  Sudan's national army.  After a Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA)  was forged by the two sides in 2005, with extensive pressure from the  U. S. , the Nuba were guaranteed a free and fair election to determine  their own political future. But the Nuba have yet to see the promises made by the CPA fulfilled.   What's more, Sudan's president al-Bashir publicly stated in April  that he would smoke the Nuba people out of the mountains using tanks  and camels, a move Phllips referred to as a declaration of war and a  'clear violation of the CPA'. Both President al-Bashir and current governor of the Nuba mountains,  Ahmed Haroun, are indicted war criminals for their roles in the  Darfur genocide. 'These men make Libya's Gadhafi look like a choir boy.  There is no  justification in my mind for bombing in Libya while we do nothing in  a place like the Nuba Mountains,' Phillips said. In July, The Satellite Sentinel Project released satellite images  consistent with mass graves in South Kordofan that confirmed similar  allegations made in a U. N.  report draft that was leaked around the  same time. But Princeton Lyman, the U. S.  envoy to Sudan, responded instead by  contradicting those claims, stating that the satellite imagery and  eyewitness accounts provided no clear evidence of mass graves. 'It amazes me how the U. S.  and international community is able to  tolerate these killers for so long, yet aggressively pursue other  villains who have not killed one-one-hundredth of the people whose  deaths Omar al-Bashir and his regime are responsible [for],' Phillips  said.   Another leaked U. N.  report indicated that some 7,000 people who had  sought refuge with the U. N.  Mission in Kadulgi, the capital of South  Kordofan, were forced on Jun.  20 to leave the U. N.  protective  perimetre.  The Red Crescent workers who moved them were reportedly  disguised members of Khartoum's security services.  Today, the U. N.   has no record of those refugees whereabouts. 'That sounds like something out of a bad movie,' Congressman Frank  Wolf bellowed at Thursday's hearing.  'The U. N.  has failed.  The U. N.   failed in Rwanda; the U. N.  failed in Bosnia; the U. N.  failed in  Darfur. ''The U. S.  government needs to have a loud voice complaining about  what's happening, and putting pressure on the U. N.  to start changing  the way they communicate on this as well,' Phillips added. As the witnesses and committee members called for an end to U. S.   diffidence at the emergency hearing, President Barack Obama unveiled  new policy plans to strengthen the U. S. 's capacity to respond more  swiftly to mass atrocities.  Announcing the implementation of the  Atrocities Prevention Board Thursday, Obama admitted that even after  witnessing the Holocaust and genocide in Rwanda, 'the United States  still lacks a comprehensive policy framework' for responding to mass  atrocities. 'What we fail to do is heed the early warning signs…raise the red  flags early,' Tom Andrews, president of the Genocide Intervention  Network, told IPS. That's exactly what Wolf pleaded for U. S.  officials to do in South  Kordofan.  'I just wonder how some people in this administration will feel when  they leave and they know they missed the opportunity,' he said.  'I  just don't want my country to fail. '