Controversy over its electoral process has dominated headlines  on the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC) in the months  preceding highly anticipated polls, but an international human  rights group shifted the world's attention to another, not  unrelated problem Wednesday - the country's feeble judicial  system. A report released by Amnesty International Wednesday detailed the  prevailing impunity of crimes under international law committed by  the Congolese army and other armed groups, notably in eastern DRC. 'The people of the DRC have suffered war crimes and crimes against  humanity, including torture, sexual violence and the use of child  soldiers, on an enormous scale and yet only a handful of perpetrators  have ever been brought to justice,' said Veronique Aubert, Amnesty  International's Africa deputy director. The rights group said that few people have access to existing justice  mechanisms, victims and witnesses are reluctant to come forward  because there is no national system to protect them, legal aid  services - though guaranteed by law - are scarce, and outreach  efforts are inadequate. Moreover, the judiciary is far from independent, with the political  and military hierarchy protecting military figures in the military  justice system, the report continued - a particular concern in a  country where the army is one of the main perpetrators of crimes. Even where prosecutions are successful 'enforcement of court  judgments is rare. . .  [and] prison escapes and extractions (assisted  escapes) are common,' the report added. Amnesty was unable to find one case where a victim was paid  compensation. But a fair trial and due process cannot be guaranteed when judges and  other judicial staff regularly face threats and interference from  political authorities and military officials, the report noted.  The rights group added that the fight against impunity must be a  priority as the scheduled November 2011 presidential elections  approach. 'The neglected victims of these terrible crimes need justice — they  must be able to contribute to the reform process in a meaningful way  and have their voices heard by the government,' said Aubert.  Whether or not the elections will provide an answer to the ongoing  violence and impunity in the Congo is questionable.  As the electoral  process forges on, fears linger that disputes over the vote's results  could disintegrate into further violence. U. S.  Ambassador to the DRC James Entwistle said that the credibility  of the elections will be a decisive factor in mitigating that  potential. 'Credible elections mean, first and foremost, transparency,'  Entiwistle said at a panel hosted by the Woodrow Wilson Center here  on Tuesday.  'It means an environment in which candidates can campaign  and voters can vote, votes are collected and tallied and announced in  an open and transparent process. . . candidates can travel and not be  hassled or intimidated. 'Almani Cyllah, Africa regional director at the International  Foundation for Electoral Systems, added that the stakes are  heightened by the potential for a spillover to the whole Great Lakes  region should violence erupt in the Congo. 'The implications for the destabilisation of the political process  will obviously destabilise the country,' Cyllah said, 'but also it  would destabilise the Great Lakes region.  We have seen that happen in  other parts of Africa. 'Concerns that the voter registration process was poorly managed have  already led to calls for more international monitoring to ensure that  problems don't carry over to the ballot box.  Meanwhile, Entwistle, who maintained that the disputed  disorganisation of the voter registration process was due to  'physical and logistical challenges', called the final list of an  estimated 31 million eligible Congolese voters 'a significant  accomplishment' and maintained a 'generally positive take' on the  success of U. S.  efforts to train and equip Congolese observers  throughout the country. 'I think it's going very well,' Entwistle said Tuesday. Other regional experts are less at ease with the integrity of  election preparations. 'There are all kinds of things that have already stopped the  elections from being free and fair,' Georges Nzongola-Ntalaja, a  Congolese professor at University of North Carolina, told IPS.  'The  registration process was extremely flawed. . . so it is not possible for  the elections to be free and fair. 'Nzongola-Ntalaja cited images of 10 and 11-year-olds registering to  vote, accounts of people with multiple cards and registering several  times, and complaints from the ground that centre placements are  plotted in locations favourable to the current president while people  living in areas concentrated with opposition support have been forced  to walk miles to the nearest centre.  The new independent electoral commission (CENI) blamed its low  budget.  Meanwhile, the parliament's decision to reduce the voting  process in the presidential ballot from two rounds to one - a move  likely to favour the incumbent president - caused further alarm,  while being defended by President Joseph Kabila of the ruling party  as an economic decision. Nzongola-Ntalaja called the financial excuses 'utter nonsense'. 'Kabila's government delayed setting up the electoral commission.  It  delayed the registration process.  It changed the constitution five  months before the vote.  All of these are costly delays that should  have been prevented,' he told IPS.  'And all of these decisions are  political. 'Kabila came to power in 2006 in the country's first multi-party  elections in 40 years, which passed off relatively smoothly thanks to  extensive international monitoring and financial aid. But even with the relative stability of the 2006 elections, Amnesty  International documented 'widespread politically motivated human  rights violations - including extrajudicial killings, arbitrary  detention and torture and other ill-treatment committed against  alleged supporters of the opposition to Kabila's ruling party in the  aftermath of the elections,' that went widely unpunished. While Amnesty contended that the government's prioritisation of a  comprehensive justice strategy was made urgent by the timeliness of  the upcoming elections, Nzongola-Ntalaja told IPS that violence and  impunity were not to be blamed for the electoral flaws, but rather,  should be attributed to them. 'The failure of free and fair elections will not be because of the  insecurity or violence in different parts of the country,' he said.   'It is the government - the manipulation of the people in power, to  stay in power - that is what's messing everything up. '