A new report by the International Committee of the Red Cross  (ICRC) describes a pattern of attacks on medical staff that  the group says is undermining the safe delivery of medical  assistance and health care across the globe. 'The violence against health care faculties and medical personnel  must end.  It's a matter of life or death,' said Yves Daccord, head of  the ICRC.  'The human cost is staggering - civilians and fighters  often die from their injuries simply because they are prevented from  receiving timely medical assistance. 'The report lists hundreds of attacks on patients, health care workers  and facilities, including looting and kidnapping, as well as arrests  by security forces and deliberate obstruction of access to vital  medical help. The ICRC focused on 16 war-torn countries, including Libya,  Afghanistan, Somalia and Colombia.  It analysed reports collected over  a two-and-a-half year period, describing 655 violent incidents, using  data obtained from humanitarian agencies, including the ICRC, and  from open sources such as the media and websites. In 33 percent of the cases, the violence was committed by state armed  forces, and 36. 9 percent by armed groups.  The report says that these  criminal actions could result in the unnecessary deaths of thousands  if not a million people around the world. Under a 150-year-old principle adopted in the first Geneva  Convention, it is the right of those wounded in war to receive  medical treatment - and the right of medical workers to move freely  to help people in need of vital assistance. 'Despite numerous efforts by the International Red Cross and its  partner, the Red Crescent Movement over decades to put an end to  these acts, the problem nonetheless continues,' says the ICRC. 'The most shocking finding is that people die in large numbers not  because they are direct victims of a roadside bomb or a shooting,'  said Robin Coupland, whose research in the 16 countries formed the  basis of the report. 'They die because the ambulance does not get there in time, because  health-care personnel are prevented from doing their job, because  hospitals are themselves targets of attacks or simply because the  environment is too dangerous for effective health care to be  delivered. 'A recent example of a hospital failing to be granted neutrality in a  conflict zone can be seen in Manama, Bahrain during this year's Arab  Spring revolt. As injured protestors came into the hospital in Manama for treatment,  the facility slowly evolved into a focal point for the movement.  As  thousands more took to the streets in the pursuit of democracy, the  hospital filled with protestors and international media. Allegations began to fly between the army and medical staff.  The  latter were accused of aiding the revolution, only treating rebels  and supplying propaganda. Forty-seven doctors were detained and put on trial, accused of aiding  the protesters and trying to overthrow the state.  They denied the  charges, and said that some of their staff were tortured in the  pursuit of confessions. Asked by IPS about the root causes of the problem, Bijan Frederic  Farnoudi, a Red Cross spokesperson, said that, 'There are several  issues involved here which make an explanation quite complex.  One  fact is that while attacks of medical services are certainly illegal,  in some places they are accepted as the norm. ''Also the change in warfare must be considered.  Conflict mainly takes  place in urban areas now.  Patients go to the hospital along with the  military, hence the hospital and the staff becomes drawn into the  conflict. ''What is important to remember about the report is that while we have  always known medical staff are hindered by these factors, the  staggering extent of the damage this causes is now clearer,' he said. Asked what can be done by the international community, Farnoudi  stated, 'There are a number of methods to tackle this problem.  It is  important to remember that this is cannot be solved by the Red Cross  or the health community.  This is because these attacks are not health  issues but security issues. ''There are a number of short-term or long-term solutions out there.   The reason we are releasing this report and holding press conferences  is to generate publicity and force the governments, armed forces and  NGO's into action and protect medical services,' he said. Doctors and medical staff are now themselves becoming causalities of  war.  In the words of Daccord, the current situation is 'one of the  most urgent yet overlooked humanitarian tragedies, the issue has been  staring us in the face for years.  It must end. 'The release of the report marks the beginning of a four year campaign  by the ICRC to remind armed groups of their responsibility to allow  the injured to receive their treatment and to permit medical  personnel to workout obstruction.  