Canada has flexed its military muscles, first in Afghanistan  for nine years alongside NATO forces, and now in Libya in its  supply of ships and combat planes for the rebel forces, but  little debate has happened on the ground among Canadians  themselves on this direction. A recent summer opinion poll by Environics discovered that among  priorities for Canadians, the economy or job creation factors as high  as 29 percent, compared to health care at 13 percent, deficit  reduction and cutting taxes tied at six percent, and defence and  crime tied at a mere four percent. 'This is a consistent trend,' said Marc Zwelling, president of Vector  Research and Development, a market research firm.  'National defence  and defence spending rank low in Canadians' long-term priorities when  your pollsters prompt respondents. 'Furthermore, 52 percent of Canadians told Environics the Conservative  government should not purchase 65 expensive F-35 fighter jet  aircraft, totaling at least nine billion dollars by Canadian  government estimates — versus 37 percent who are in favour of a deal.  That division on the planes didn't help the opposition Liberals, who  put particular pressure on the Conservatives on the issue but ended  up - for a variety of reasons, including leadership - being reduced  to third party status in the May 2011 federal election.  Here, the  militarily hawkish Conservatives led by Stephen Harper won for the  first time a majority of seats in the House of Commons. A similar disconnect has happened in Afghanistan, with Canadians in  ever larger numbers telling pollsters they oppose the involvement of  their soldiers in NATO's protracted battle against the Taliban  insurgents.  In one Ekos 2010 poll, it was 49 percent opposed, 36  percent in favour and 14 percent with neither position.  But Afghanistan has not translated into a major issue either, even  though one party, the social democratic New Democrats - now the  official opposition since May - have consistently favoured withdrawal  of Canadian troops from the Central Asian country, notes defence  analyst Philippe Lagassé, an assistant professor in the Graduate  School of Public and International Affairs at the University of  Ottawa. Furthermore, the Canadian mainstream political parties, right and  left, appear to have developed a common consensus on the necessity  for increased defence expenditures, he said. 'I find that to be a very problematic notion simply because it does  lead us down to situations like Afghanistan and like Libya, where all  parties agree among themselves to be quiet and not say much,' Lagassé  told IPS.  'When everybody agrees then it is not necessarily a good  thing for oversight and debate. ' Another defence analyst, Walter Dorn, an associate professor at the  Canadian Forces College in Toronto, says the failure of NATO to bring  the war to a conclusion in Afghanistan could result in Canada  returning to participating in U. N.  peacekeeping missions, in which  the country has had considerable expertise since the 1950s. 'We've had this terrible experience in Afghanistan, 157 military  personnel dead, and 20 billion dollars spent,' he told IPS. The difficult problems of debt and finance will force the governments  of the United States and European countries like Britain and France  to scale back defence spending and in the process 'their military  adventures', Dorn suggested. 'The pendulum will start to swing back,' he predicted.  'Canada will  provide the forces when needed in the circumstances, and I think the  U. S.  will be much less interested in being involved in wars that  [former U. S.  president George] Bush launched [in Iraq and  Afghanistan].  The budget cuts are going to be great throughout the  Western world. 'But the Conservative government in Ottawa may stick with its current  two percent annual growth expenditure for defence while trimming and  even cutting other federal departments and programmes, says David  MacDonald, an economist with the Canadian Centre for Policy  Alternatives in Ottawa. Defence spending can be a mixed blessing economically, MacDonald told  IPS.  While the new proposed ships for Canada's navy will be built  inside Canada, such will not be the case for the F-35s once the deal  with the U. S. -based manufacturer Lockheed Martin is signed in the  next few years. 'The F35s cost a lot more money than the ships and they are going to  be built in the U. S.  So Canada does not see an economic benefit from  any major job creation,' he said. Starting in 2006 near the end of the Liberal government in Ottawa,  the pro-military lobby has successfully convinced politicians of the  necessity to reorient the Canadian Forces towards a greater combat  role and outfitted with the best equipment for that scenario, said  Lagassé. The policy of curtailing defence expenditures in the 1990s by the  previous Liberal government of Jean Chretien meant that Canada was  'not being taken seriously' in the world, he said. 'The mission in Kandahar has given Canada a more prominent place in  NATO and a greater degree of respect from larger allies, such as the  U. S. , UK, and France.  In order to retain that prominent place and the  favour of allied governments, successive governments have been  willing to invest more in the military and take on more difficult  missions,' he explained. The military lobby has sought to rebrand Canada 'as a nation forged  in fire', dating back to World War I when the country lost about  60,000 soldiers in combat, says Jamie Swift, co-author of a  forthcoming book, 'Warrior Nation, Rebranding Canada in a Fearful  Age'.  'I don't believe it has been entirely successful,' Swift told IPS.   'The military has gone on a huge public relations campaign at our  expense since 2006, Operation Connection, to increase a military  presence at public gatherings and sports.  To try to convince  Canadians that the military must be a central institution in Canadian  life and indeed that military spending should go up. 'A weak anti-war movement at home has made countering this message a  challenge, adds Swift.  But he remains hopeful.  'If Canada got  involved in a big shooting war, the peace movement might be  rekindled,' he concluded. 