Pakistani civilian and military leaders are insisting on an  effective veto over which targets U. S.  drone strikes hit,  according to well-informed Pakistani military sources here. The sources, who met with IPS on condition that they not be  identified, said that such veto power over the conduct of the drone  war is a central element in a new Pakistani demand for a formal  government-to-government agreement on the terms under which the  United States and Pakistan will cooperate against insurgents in  Pakistan. The basic government-to-government agreement now being demanded would  be followed, the sources said, by more detailed agreements between  U. S.  and Pakistani military leaders and intelligence agencies. The new Pakistani demand for equal say over drone strikes marks the  culmination of a long evolution in the Pakistani military's attitude  toward the drone war.  Initially supportive of strikes that were  targeting Al-Qaeda leaders, senior Pakistani military leaders soon  came to realise that the drone war carried serious risks for  Pakistan's war against the Pakistani Taliban.  A key turning point in the attitude of the military was the  unilateral U. S.  decision to focus the drone war on those Pakistani  insurgents who had already decided to make peace with the Pakistani  government and who opposed the war being waged by Al-Qaeda and the  Pakistani Taliban against the Pakistani military.  The Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) was allowed to run the drone  war almost completely unilaterally for years, according to former  Pakistani military leaders and diplomats, and the Pakistani military  has only mustered the political will to challenge the U. S.  power to  carry out drone strikes unilaterally in recent months.  Gen.  Pervez Musharraf allowed the drone strikes from 2004 to 2007 in  order to ensure political support from the George W.  Bush  administration, something Musharraf had been denied during the Bill  Clinton administration, Shamshad Ahmad, who was Pakistan's foreign  secretary and then ambassador to the United Nations from 1997 to  2002, told IPS. 'Those were the days when we felt that we had to work with the  Americans on Al-Qaeda,' recalled Gen.  Asad Durrani, a former director  general of Pakistan's Inter Services Intelligence agency (ISI), in an  interview with IPS.  The choice of targets 'usually was done by the U. S.  unilaterally',  said Durrani.  Two Pakistani generals confirmed that point in a  separate interview with IPS.  The Musharraf regime even went so far as to provide cover for the  drone strikes, repeatedly asserting after strikes that the explosions  had been caused by the victims themselves making home-made bombs. But that effort at transparent deception by the U. S.  and Musharraf  quickly fell apart when drone strikes were based on faulty  intelligence and killed large numbers of civilians rather than Al- Qaeda leaders.  The worst such strike was an Oct.  30, 2006 drone attack on a madrassa  in Chenagai village in Bajauer agency, which killed 82 people.   Musharraf, who was primarily concerned with avoiding the charge of  complicity in U. S.  attacks on Pakistani targets, ordered the  Pakistani military to take complete responsibility for the incident.  The spokesman for the Pakistani military claimed 'confirmed  intelligence reports that 70 to 80 militants were hiding in a  madrassa used as a terrorist training facility' and said the  Pakistani military had fired missiles at the madrassa.  But eyewitnesses in the village identified U. S.  drones as the source  of the attack and said all the victims were simply local students of  the madrassa.  Local people compiled a complete list of the names and  ages of all 80 victims, showing that 25 of the dead had been aged  seven to 15, which was published in the Lahore daily The News  International. Senior military officers believed the CIA had other reasons for  launching the strike in Bajaur.  The day before the drone attack,  tribal elders in Bajaur had held a public meeting to pledge their  willingness to abide by a peace accord with the government, and the  government had released nine tribesmen, including some militants. Former ISI chief Durrani recalled that the strike 'effectively  sabotaged the chances for an agreement' in Bejaur.  That was 'a very  clear message' from the CIA not to enter into any more such peace  agreements, Durrani told IPS. The Bejaur madrassa strike was a turning point for many officers.  'So  many of us went in and said this is stupid,' Durrani recalled.  When Musharraf was pressured to step down as Army chief of staff, and  was replaced by Gen.  Ashfaq Parvez Kayani in November 2007, the  unilateral character of the CIA's drone war 'pretty much continued',  according to Gen.  Jehanger Karamat, who was ambassador to the United  States from 2004 to 2006 after having retired as Army chief of staff  in 1998.  The CIA's drone war became more contentious in 2008, as the Bush  administration concentrated the strikes on those who had made peace  with the Pakistani government.  Two-thirds of the drone strikes that  year were on targets associated with Jalalludin Haqqani and Mullah  Nazeer, both of whom were involved in supporting Taliban forces in  Afghanistan, but who opposed attacks on the Pakistani government.  Targeting the Haqqani network and his allies posed serious risks for  Pakistan.  When the Pakistani Army was fighting in South Waziristan,  it had its logistic base in an area that was controlled by the  Haqqani group, and it had been able to count on the security of that  base. Meanwhile, ISI had given the CIA accurate information on anti- Pakistan Taliban leader Baitullah Mehsud's location on four  occasions, but the U. S.  had failed to target him, according to a May  2009 column by retired Pakistani Gen.  Shaukat Qadir.  In 2009, more of the drone strikes - almost 40 percent of the total -  focused on the Taliban under Mehsud, and Mehsud himself was killed,  which tended to mollify the Pakistani military.  But that effect did not last long.  In 2010, only three strikes were  aimed at Mehsud's anti-Pakistan Taliban organisation, while well over  half the strikes were against Hafiz Gul Bahadur, an ally of Haqqani  who had signed an agreement with the Pakistani government in  September 2006 that he would not shelter any anti-Pakistani  militants. The Barack Obama administration had made a deliberate decision around  mid-2010 that it didn't care if targeting the Haqqani network and  other pro-Pakistani Taliban groups upset the Pakistanis, as the Wall  Street Journal reported Oct.  23, 2010.  But two events caused Pakistani army chief Kayani to demand a  fundamental change in U. S.  policy toward the drone war.  The first was the arrest of CIA operative Raymond Davis on the charge  of killing two Pakistanis in cold blood in January, which was  followed by intense U. S.  pressure for his release.  The second was a drone strike on Mar.  17, just one day after Davis  was released, which was initially reported to have been an attack on  a gathering of Haqqani network officials.  It turned out that the drone attack had killed dozens of tribal and  sub-tribal elders who had gathered from all over North Waziristan to  discuss an economic issue. A former U. S.  official admitted that the strike was carried out  because the CIA was 'angry' over the fact that Davis had been kept in  prison for seven weeks.  'It was retaliation for Davis,' the official  said, according to an Aug.  2 Associated Press story.  That strike helped galvanise the Pakistani military leadership.  ISI  chief Shuja Pasha took it as a slap in the face, because he had  personally intervened to get Davis out of jail.  Kayani shocked the  Americans by issuing the first denunciation of drone strikes by an  Army chief. When Pasha went to Washington in April, he took with him the first  official Pakistani demand for an equal say in drone strike decisions.  *Gareth Porter is an investigative historian and journalist  specialising in U. S.  national security policy.  The paperback edition  of his latest book, 'Perils of Dominance: Imbalance of Power and the  Road to War in Vietnam', was published in 2006. 