Witnesses reported that attacks continue on civilian  populations in Sudan, even as the United Nations calls  for a  thorough investigation into violations of international law  carried out in South Kordofan state in June. 'I would like to appeal to the United Nations Security Council to  provide immediate protection to the civilians in South Kordofan and  the Nuba Mountains.  People are now being displaced every day to the  mountains by government air strikes,' a survivor of a Sudanese Air  Force (SAF) air strike told Radio Dabanga on Wednesday after the  bombing of some villages in South Kordofan. Those violations, if substantiated, are said to amount to crimes  against humanity or war crimes, according to a preliminary report  issued Monday by the Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights  (OHCHR) and the former U. N.  Mission in Sudan (UNMIS). The report describes a wide range of alleged violations of  international law in the town of Kadugli, as well as in the  surrounding Nuba Mountains, after fighting broke out in Kadugli on  Jun.  5 between the Sudanese Armed Forces (SAF) and the Sudan People's  Liberation Army North (SPLA-N). Alleged violations comprise 'extrajudicial killings, arbitrary  arrests  and illegal detention, enforced disappearances, attacks against  civilians, looting of civilian homes, destruction of property as well  as massive displacement. 'The preliminary report only covers the month of June, but there is  evidence that civilian lives are still at risk.  The Sudan People's  Liberation Movement-North (SPLM-N) had earlier this month confirmed  repeated shelling carried out by the SAF in South Kordofan. Sudan's government in Khartoum dismissed the U. N.  report, calling it  'malicious' and 'unfounded', the day after its release.  Justice  Minister Mohamed Bushara Dosa said a special committee would be  created to assess human rights in the conflict-ridden area.  According to Matt Chancey, director of the Persecution Project  Foundation, a Christian aid group, the U. N.  should declare a  humanitarian crisis and resume aid flights.  He said there is no doubt that the ongoing attacks against South  Sudan  fall under the category of war crimes.  'There is already enough  evidence provided by many credible, seasoned reporters and  humanitarian workers of war crimes being committed in the Nuba  Mountains.  Pictures, video, and personal testimony is readily  available,' Chancey told IPS. He urged the international community to institute a 'no-fly' zone and  said humanitarian flights should resume to assist refugees and  internally displaced.  'The longer it takes for this to happen, the  greater the humanitarian crisis will be in the future as fields lie  uncultivated due to the threat of aerial bombardment,' he added.  More than 400,000 civilians have been displaced.  Official figures  from  the U. N.  are lower, but they do not account for the many thousands of  people driven from their homes to the shelter of nearby rocky hills,  fleeing from aerial bombings, the Persecution Project Foundation  reported.  One result is that farmers will be unable to cultivate their fields  during the upcoming crucial rainy season.  And because Khartoum is  denying access to all relief organisations, observers expect the  situation will continue to deteriorate. 'This means a humanitarian disaster looms in the coming months when  thousands of families face food shortages,' Chancey said.  On Wednesday, the Satellite Sentinel Project, led by a U. S. -based  group, released images of what appear to be two piles of corpses  wrapped in body bags on a mountainside in Kadugli, South Kordofan  state's capital, Voice of America reported.  Experts say that a ceasefire must be declared soon.  Both the SPLA-N  and the SPLM-N agreed to seek a cessation of hostilities in a  document  also signed by Sudan's government in late June.  However, on Jul.  1, Sudanese President Omar al-Bashir dismissed the  agreement and declared that the 'cleansing' - literally translated  from the Arabic - of the Nuba Mountains would continue.  'The only way in which genocide in South Kordofan can be halted is if  there is a concerted, robust international pressure exerted upon the  Khartoum regime,' Eric Reeves, a Sudan expert, analyst and author of  several publications on the subject, told IPS. However, he said that there is no indication that the international  community is prepared to exert this kind of pressure.  'The fighting will continue as long as Khartoum thinks it may achieve  its goals militarily,' Reeves added.  'I believe that Khartoum wishes  to annihilate the African Nuba people. 'As Chancey told IPS, the primary reason the war started was because  the National Congress Party (NCP) Governor-elect in Southern Kordofan  - and indicted war criminal - Ahmed Haroun ordered all SPLM/A forces  out of Southern Kordofan by Jun.  1, in direct violation of the  Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA), which allows the SPLM/A to  operate in Southern Kordofan until 90 days after the expiration of  the  CPA on Jul.  9 this year.  When the SPLM/A refused to leave, Haroun's forces tried to disarm  them  by force, triggering the current conflict.  'The NCP wants this war.  This is the same regime that killed more  than  two million South Sudanese during the last war.  This is the same  regime that killed 500,000 Nuba people in the 1990s.  This is the same  regime that has so far killed 400,000 Darfur citizens,' Chancey said.  