After tiptoeing toward demanding the ouster of Bashir Al-Assad  over the last several months, U. S.  President Barack Obama  Thursday finally jumped over the line with his first explicit  call for the Syrian president to resign. 'The future of Syria must be determined by its people, but President  Bashar al-Assad is standing in their way,' Obama said in a statement  released by the White House.  'For the sake of the Syrian people, the  time has come for President Assad to step aside. ' Obama's statement was followed by the imposition of sweeping economic  sanctions, including a freeze on all Syrian state assets under U. S.   jurisdiction and a total ban on U. S.  companies and citizens  conducting any business with Damascus.  Because U. S.  commercial relations with Syria are negligible, however,  administration officials said they hoped Washington's latest steps  will be replicated by the European Union (EU), whose economic ties  with Damascus — particularly in the energy field -- are far more  significant, when its senior diplomatic officials meet in Brussels  Friday. For their part, European leaders echoed Obama's demand shortly after  the White House released his statement.  'The EU has repeatedly  emphasised that the brutal repression must be stopped…,' said the  EU's foreign policy chief, Catherine Ashton. 'The Syrian leadership, however, has remained defiant.  This shows  that the Syrian regime is unwilling to change…,' she went on.  'The EU  notes the complete loss of legitimacy in the eyes of the Syrian  people and the necessity for him to step aside. 'Yet a third statement was issued jointly by British Prime Minister  David Cameron, French President Nicolas Sarkozy, and German  Chancellor Angela Merkel in which they called on Assad 'to face the  reality of the complete rejection of his regime by the Syrian people  and to step aside…'The co-ordinated statements, as well as the EU's anticipated  sanctions, appeared to be the fruit of an intense diplomatic campaign  orchestrated by Washington over the past month to pressurise Assad  into either halting the violent repression of his security forces  against largely peaceful demonstrations across most of Syria or   stepping down.  That repression, which was condemned in a UN Security Council  statement earlier this month, has resulted in the deaths of some  2,000 people and the detention of more than 10,000 others over the  five months since major protests against the regime first began,  according to local and human-rights groups.  'This has been in the works for some time, with the U. S.  playing the  role of choirmaster,' said Joshua Landis, a Syria expert at the  University of Oklahoma, about Washington's latest efforts to rally  international support behind the call for Assad to step down. 'While the sanctions are virtually meaningless on the American side,  (Secretary of State Hillary) Clinton has done her homework and gotten  the Europeans on board.  If the Europeans and the Turks join on energy  sanctions, that could have a profound psychological effect on Syrians  who have remained loyal to the regime,' he told IPS. Since April, both the U. S.  and the EU have imposed sanctions,  including asset freezes, against key members of the Assad regime,  including Assad himself, and its most influential supporters.  They  have also worked together in a number of multilateral fora, including  the Security Council, to both isolate Damascus diplomatically and  shine a harsh spotlight on its repression. Until Thursday, however, they had declined to call explicitly for  Assad to step down for a variety of reasons, including a combination  of hopes that he would follow through on his many promises to carry  out far-reaching reforms and of fears that his departure would set  the stage for even greater bloodshed and possibly sectarian civil  war. Despite constant pressure from neo-conservatives and other pro-Israel  hawks who have long had Assad in their gun sights due to his support  for Hizbollah and Hamas and close ties to Iran, the administration  also resisted taking a harder public line against Assad for fear that  doing so would make it politically more difficult for other key  powers, notably Russia, Turkey, and Saudi Arabia, to move against him  while making it easier for Assad to depict the opposition as being  manipulated by Washington. 'There was legitimate hesitation about getting too far out in front  lest regime change in Syria be seen as a specifically U. S.  project,  which would not be helpful to oppositionists inside Syria,' said Paul  Pillar, a former top CIA Middle East analyst teaching at Georgetown  University.  But recent statements by the leaders of all three countries  expressing exasperation with the continuing repression apparently  encouraged Obama to take the leap.  In particular, Saudi King Abdullah's angry appeal ten days ago for  Assad to 'stop the killing machine' — as well as his recall, along  with those of several other Gulf leaders, of his ambassador in  Damascus — and Turkish Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan's  comparison this week of Assad to Libyan leader Moammar Gaddafi were  cited by senior administration officials as key indicators of a  sufficient international consensus to warrant the administration's  latest move. 'You know, it's not going to be any news if the United States says  Assad needs to go,' Clinton said Monday.  But 'if Turkey says it, if  King Abdullah says it, if other people say it, there is no way the  Assad regime can ignore it. 'Now that it has been said, however, it remains unclear what happens  next.  Landis and other experts stressed that sweeping economic  sanctions of the kind being imposed by western powers this week would  not necessarily be sufficient to bring about the regime's collapse.  'We can't predict how long this transition will take,' admitted one  senior official who briefed reporters after Obama's announcement.   'Nothing about it is likely to be easy.  But we're certain that Assad  is on the way out. 'Indeed, independent experts predicted a long struggle that could  increase the bloodshed and quite possibly precipitate a civil war. 'The regime seems to have the willpower, incentive, and means to  stick around for a while,' according to David Lesch, a Middle East  expert at Trinity University in Texas, writing Thursday in  foreignpolicy. com. 'None of this changes the fact that the Syrian opposition is  extremely young and extremely fragmented, and the Syrian regime is  united and has the military behind it,' said Landis, who publishes  the much-read 'syriacomment. com' blog.  'Its firepower remains as  strong as it was yesterday, and the opposition's firepower has not  improved because of this. ''Ultimately, if (the latest measures) don't work in causing  defections within the military and the business elite, then it  becomes a military problem, and you're on a slippery slope.  This is  what happened in Iraq; this is what happened in Libya,' he noted. Pillar also predicted a 'long and turbulent process,' noting that the  opposition to the regime 'has not yet erected credible structures  that could be the basis for assuming power in the foreseeable  future. ''I think Assad's days are numbered, but one ought to be concerned  about just how long and difficult a process it will be before there's  anything remotely resembling stability in Syria,' he told IPS. 'It is hard to conceive of an incentive for Assad himself or other  insiders in the regime to voluntarily relinquish power no matter how  difficult a squeeze the sanctions have placed on them and on Syria as  a whole,' he added. What he called the 'likely coming conflict in Syria' could have a  'very strong sectarian dimension, given that an Alawite-dominated  regime will be replaced by what almost certainly will be a Sunni- dominated regime. ' That, in turn, could exacerbate sectarian  animosities and tensions across the region, he noted. *Jim Lobe's blog on U. S.  foreign policy can be read at  http://www. lobelog. com. 