On Jun.  19, Angelo al-Sir, a subsistence farmer from a small  village east of Kadugli, capital of the oil-rich South  Kordofan state in Northern Sudan, saw his pregnant wife, two  of his 10 children, his nephew and another relative killed in  an airstrike in broad daylight. Al-Sir later told international researchers that his wife had been  planting crops in the family's field when an Antonov airplane was  heard circling overhead. Moments later bombs rained down around al-Sir's simple home, its  fragments decapitating his wife and piercing the skulls of his  children who were cooking together in the kitchen. The 40-year-old farmer and his family had done nothing to warrant  such brutality.  His only crime was to be a dweller of the Nuba  Mountains, a region rife with supporters of the Southern Sudan  People's Liberation Movement (SPLM) which is currently weathering a  ferocious attack launched by Sudanese Armed Forces (SAF), the  military wing of the Arab-minority government in Khartoum. Concluding weeks of investigations and interviews with civilians in  the region, Amnesty International and Human Rights Watch released a  report Tuesday documenting irrefutable evidence of indiscriminate  bombing of civilian areas by the SAF, prevention of food delivery and  other humanitarian aid, and an ethnically-targeted offensive that is  driving scores of unarmed civilians deeper into the mountains. 'The relentless bombing campaign is killing and maiming civilian men,  women, and children, displacing tens of thousands, putting them in  desperate need of aid, and preventing entire communities from  planting crops and feeding their children,' said Daniel Bekele,  Africa director at Human Rights Watch, in a press release Tuesday. Donatella Rovera, Amnesty International's senior crisis response  advisor, added, 'The Sudanese government is literally getting away  with murder and trying to keep the outside world from finding out.   The international community, and particularly the U. N.  Security  Council, must stop looking the other way and act to address the  situation. 'While rights organisations and independent researchers have been  unearthing evidence of ethnic cleansing in South Kordofan since early  June, the North's ruling National Congress Party (NCP) continues to  vehemently deny reports of illegal actions, claiming that the  offensive against the peoples of South Kordofan is necessary in order  to eliminate the lingering threat of armed rebels. But U. S.  State Department spokesperson Victoria Nuland said Tuesday  that, 'The United States is deeply concerned about reports of  continued Sudanese air force bombings of civilian areas in Southern  Kordofan, despite President Bashir's announcement of a unilateral  two-week ceasefire last Tuesday. ''She added, 'The United States calls upon the government of Sudan to  adhere to its commitments [and] further call on both sides to allow  unfettered humanitarian access to affected populations in the state. 'Slow international reactionSince Jul.  9, the media has largely carried celebratory reports of  the long-awaited independence of South Sudan following more than a  quarter century of bloody civil war that left over two million dead  from fighting and famine. But even as the world watched the hoisting of a new flag in Africa's  54th state and saluted a 'peaceful partition', a battle was raging in  the Northern border-state of South Kordofan, whose indigenous  population has long sympathised with the political and economic  aspirations of the Southern rebels, fighting alongside them against  Omar al-Bashir's Northern forces during the civil war. When the secession of South Sudan — home to three-quarters of the  country's oil fields — became imminent earlier this year, the NCP  ordered the peoples of South Kordofan to disarm. But according to independent researcher Eric Reeves — one of the  first and only commentators to extensively document the facts of  ethnic cleansing and civilian attacks — 'The Nuba people have never  been treated like human beings by Khartoum. ' 'When I [visited] the Nuba Mountains… I spoke to a number of senior  military officials and civil society leaders,' Reeves told IPS in  June.  'And they made very clear to me that they have no exit, and no  option but to fight, and fight to the death. '  Civilians in the crossfireNow, Amnesty and HRW's findings say categorically that the NCP can no  longer hide behind proclamations of innocence and must allow an  independent investigation and face the likelihood of war crimes  charges. The ongoing aerial bombardment has already devastated huge swathes of  the civilian population; 150,000 people — 'possibly more' — have fled  their homes, taken refuge with neighbours, or constructed makeshift  shelters from scant supplies. None of the researchers found any evident of military targets close  to air strike locations, and countless witnesses claimed that the  high-speed fighter jets continuously bombed open fields, schools and  other non-military targets. Weapons experts have ascertained that the munitions have been  unguided and rolled out manually from cargo planes in a way that does  not allow for accurate delivery. 'Use of weapons in a civilian area that cannot accurately be directed  at a military objective makes such strikes inherently indiscriminate,  in violation of international humanitarian law,' the rights groups  said Tuesday. The displaced also lack basic medicine, sanitation, and shelter from  heavy rains.  Many of those interviewed were on the verge of  starvation and had resorted to feeding their children berries and  leaves in the absence of food. Valerie Amos, U. N.  under-secretary-general for humanitarian affairs,  issued an emergency statement Tuesday saying, 'The crisis in South  Kordofan has reached a critical point.  The Government of Sudan has  denied permission to international aid agencies to replenish stocks  and deploy personnel for six weeks. ' She added, 'Essential supplies have been completely depleted in many  parts of South Kordofan, leaving many people in a life-threatening  situation without any prospect of relief. ''Unless there is an immediate stop to the fighting, and humanitarian  organizations are granted immediate and unhindered independent access  throughout South Kordofan, people in many parts of the State face…  catastrophic levels of malnutrition and mortality. 'The watchdogs' report also documented evidence of sexual abuse,  forced returns to Kadugli, violence and intimidation of civilians at  the hands of armed forces, and assassinations of people attempting to  flee — all violations of the laws of war and armed conflict as  specified by the United Nations. 