As the latest round of Asia’s longest-running guerrilla war winds down, scores  of journalists here are experiencing intimidation and harassment for being  critical of the military campaign against the separatist Liberation Tigers of Tamil  Eelam (LTTE).  The issues currently in focus are the rising number of civilian casualties,  repeated calls for a ‘ceasefire’ by the U. N.  and the international community,  and a government plea for international humanitarian assistance to tackle a  mounting crisis. 'Maybe journalists don’t want to talk about these things given the fear  psychosis that has engulfed the media,' noted a veteran journalist, who  declined to be named for fear of reprisal.  Some journalists have even opted to  leave the country. N.  Vithiyatharan, Editor of the Uthayan and Sudar-Oli newspapers, was  released on Friday after two months in detention after a local magistrate in  Colombo ruled that there was no evidence to link him to a Tamil rebel air  strike in Colombo in February 2009. Vithiyatharan, a member of the Tamil minority community, said in a  newspaper interview on Saturday that he was detained by the government to  prevent him from highlighting the grievances of displaced Tamil civilians in  the north. His plight is typical of dozens of journalists, the majority from the Tamil  community, who have been branded as pro-LTTE, anti-war or anti-national,  in the past 18 months since President Mahinda Rajapaksa’s government  intensified the battle against the LTTE in January 2008. Thousands, combatants and civilians, have died or been injured in the  conflict.  The rebels are now confined to a small patch of land of the northern  coastal jungles along with thousands of civilians whom the government says  are not being allowed to leave - they are being used as human shields by the  Tigers. Colombo has seen a flurry of visits by international leaders with the foreign  ministers of Britain and France also due in an effort to persuade the  government to enforce a ceasefire to allow the civilians to leave the conflict  zone. Since before ground troops began advancing about six months ago into the  deep jungles of the north to oust the rebels from their headquarters in  Kilinochchi and other areas, reporters have not been allowed into the conflict  areas and any criticism of the military is frowned upon by the government. Iqbal Athas, the award winning defence columnist of The Sunday Times and  considered Sri Lanka’s best-known writer on military affairs, has not written  his column for weeks and is said to be abroad. Jehan Perera, Executive Director at the National Peace Council (NPC), which  has been at the forefront of promoting a peaceful end to the conflict, says  the restrictions on war reporting are in place because the government  doesn’t want information on the high civilian cost of the war reaching the  public. 'This has kept the morale of the people high as they only hear the  government side, and are told about the successes only.  The international  community also doesn’t know what is going on and may have been more  critical of the war if they had the information [on civilian casualties, etc],'  Perera, also a political columnist, said. The war successes have also won heavy support from large sections of the  population.  On Saturday, Rajapaksa’s ruling party swept a regional poll in the  Western Province securing a two-thirds majority and wiping out the main  Opposition United National Party in many of its strongholds in the capital,  Colombo. Stressing that the cost of the war is very 'high' Perera said, if balanced  reporting was permitted, there would have been more criticism of the cost of  the war and more critical voices would have entered the fray. The government has been roundly condemned over the past several months  for muzzling the media on war reporting.  In February 2009, a group of  journalists’ associations and trade unions in the Asia-Pacific region meeting  in Hong Kong expressed their deep concern over continuing violations of  media rights in Sri Lanka, and urged the Sri Lankan Government to uphold  the law and live up to its responsibilities. In a joint statement the groups the groups drew attention to bad situation for  the media in Sri Lanka and highlighted cases of particular concern: the  murder of prominent editor Lasantha Wickrematunge, an arson attack on the  facilities of independent broadcaster Sirasa TV, a knife attack on a newspaper  editor and his wife, and continuing verbal threats by ministers and other  senior government members directed against journalists and media workers. 'Several of Sri Lanka’s most well-known journalists have left the country  fearing for their lives,' the group said.  Sri Lanka’s biggest media body, the Sri  Lanka Press Institute, has a special fund to take care of journalists under  threat or send them abroad. In January, the U. S.  State Department urged the government to prevent  attacks and intimidation of the media.  'A free and independent media is vital  to ensuring the health and continuation of any democracy,' it said. President Rajapaksa regularly has briefings with editors of newspapers and  has denied his government’s role in the killings or abductions, claiming this  is the work of disgruntled groups bent on tarnishing the image of the  government. Rather than backing down from the chorus of media protests, the  government has been on the offensive over what it says is biased reporting.   On Feb.  1, Defence Secretary Gotabaya Rajapaksa, warned that foreign media  organisations would face 'dire consequences' and be 'chased out' of the  country if they did not behave 'responsibly. 'In a statement, he accused some international news organisations of partisan  reporting on the situation regarding civilian casualties and suffering in  conflict areas. Some analysts however say the clash between the media and the government  has been going on for decades.  Lakshman Gunasekara, senior journalist,  former editor of the state-owned Sunday Observer and media activist, says  that for the past 30 years of the armed conflict, the media has displayed  ethnic biases in its coverage of the war. 'A dominant section of the media has played down perceptions and problems  of minorities,' he said, adding however that at the same time the media has  tried to fulfil its expected ‘watchdog’ role of critical coverage of public affairs  and governance but, in doing so, has suffered violent suppression under  successive governmental regimes. Gunasekara said the current governmental regime, like its predecessors, have  regularly used the real contingency of combating insurgency as an excuse to  muzzle the national media. A northern journalist, who has reported on the war for more than two  decades, said, 'We have to report only what the government is saying.   Anything negative would have serious consequences. 'He said after the operations were intensified in January 2008, even field  commanders who freely spoke to the media were silent and inaccessible. 'The strategy is that the government doesn’t want any setbacks or losses on  the field to be known to the public and also soldiers on the field as it would  affect their morale,' the journalist told IPS. Gunasekera says that there has been media repression in other war-affected  countries, but the media has braved this and raised issues.  'Here, perhaps  due to the severity of the tight controls and fear of repercussions, the media  has been silent,' he added. Gunasekera says that dozens of journalists have been killed during the past  25 years, while scores more have been harassed and intimidated. In January, the government said 9 journalists had been killed since January  2006, 27 assaulted and another 5 abducted.  Of the abductions, 4 were found  while one remains missing, Chief Government Whip Dinesh Gunawardena said  in Parliament, adding that the police have gathered vital information with  regard to the killing of journalists. However despite these assurances, not a single perpetrator of these criminal  acts has been brought to book. 