At the end of the long editorial room of ‘The Sunday Leader’ hangs a large  sketch of Lasantha Wickrematunge, the late editor of the newspaper, who was  assassinated on Jan.  7.  He was shot in his car, just five minutes from his office.  It is a familiar pose of Wickrematunge’s, leaning back in his chair, smiling; yet  his raised fingers make it clear that he is making a point, like he always did.   Since his assassination, Wickrematunge, who was posthumously named  recipient of the 2009 UNESCO World Press Freedom Prize, has become a  rallying point for journalists, especially those he nurtured. 'He was a very courageous person, he never wavered from his beliefs, no  matter what came his way, even death,' said Arthur Wamanan, a young  journalist who began his career under the late editor. 'He used to say that the worst that could happen is for you to get killed,'  Wamanan said, recalling his editor’s words.  Many at ‘The Sunday Leader’ and  outside of it agree that Wickrematunge was a courageous individual whose  feisty nature was reflected in his newspaper. 'You look around, there are not many people who go out and speak what they  believe in and stand by it,' Mandana Ismail Abeyawickrema, the news editor  of ‘The Sunday Leader,’ said in an interview. The slain editor’s courage in the face of imminent danger is acknowledged by  his widow, Sonali Samarasinghe Wickrematunge, herself a journalist who  worked very closely with her late husband.  'Despite threats and the physical attacks on him and the newspapers he and I  edited, Lasantha never ran scared.  He continued to expose graft and  corruption, wastage of public funds and gross excesses on the part of the  administration,' she told IPS from an undisclosed location. She left Sri Lanka a month after Wickrematunge’s death and now calls herself  an editor in exile. 'He was political, but there was more to Lasantha than that.  He was the only  editor of his time that could galvanise his audience and those who worked  with him in equal measure,' Abeyawickrema said. She believes that Wickrematunge’s biggest achievement, aside from his long  list of investigative stories, is the stable of mid-level journalists which he  built. 'He had this uncanny ability to spot talent, at a very raw age,' says Dilrukshi  Handunnetti, the investigations editor at ‘The Sunday Leader. ’ She told IPS  that Wickrematunge detected a hidden ability in her years after she had  begun her career as a journalist. 'I never thought I would be an investigative reporter, I always considered the  political beat as my main line of work.  It was Lasantha who brought out the  investigative reporter in me,' Handunnetti said.  'I have worked with three  editors in this country, this man was by far was the best, he was very  special. 'Following Wickrematunge’s insistence, Handunnetti began working on and  writing investigative pieces long after she had made a name for herself as a  lobby correspondent.  She eventually rose to head the investigations desk of  ‘The Sunday Leader. ’'Lasantha was like a reflector, he would take in all the pressure and the  intimidations and not let them affect his writers.  You were always sure that  he was going to look after you and give you the freedom to work,' Wamanan  told IPS. On Apr.  6, UNESCO announced Wickrematunge was the recipient of the 2009  UNESCO World Press Freedom Prize.  The jury of 14 professional journalists  from around the world lauded him as a man who faced imminent threats with  courage rarely shown by others. 'Jury members were moved to an almost unanimous choice by a man who  was clearly conscious of the dangers he faced, but nevertheless chose to  speak out, even beyond his grave,' said Joe Thloloe, president of the jury and  press ombudsman of the Press Council of South Africa.  'Lasantha  Wickrematunge continues to inspire journalists around the world. 'For those who worked with him, the award is bittersweet, like so many other  accolades that have come after the murder.  'He should have been recognised  well before all this.  We can now feel his value by default, because of the  vacuum he has left behind.  His assassination has opened a huge chasm in  local journalism and there is no one on the horizon to fill that,'  Abeyawickrema, ‘The Sunday Leader’ news editor, said. Wickrematunge’s widow echoed the same sentiments - that it would not be  easy to fill her late husband’s shoes.  'Following his death, independent media  took a tremendous blow.  So terrified are the independent media of the  violence that is capable of being unleashed against them that they have  engaged in self-censorship and dare not even call to account the perpetrators  in cases where media workers have been the victims. 'Wickrematunge was also awarded the 1st Asia Media Award for Press  Freedom in Bangkok, Thailand in March and Handunnetti accepted the award  on his behalf.  'I was proud and sad, proud to represent a great journalist, sad  because his achievements are only recognised posthumously. ''As much as this posthumous award is a personal honour to both Lasantha,  and myself as his widow and colleague, it also serves as a reminder to the  world of the horrific circumstances of my husband's death,' the widow told  IPS. The journalists at ‘The Sunday Leader’ are driven by their late editor’s zeal, to  keep writing.  'That is the best honour we can bring him, to keep reporting,'  Wamanan said. 