Nearly three decades of war ended in Sri Lanka last week and a victorious  President Mahinda Rajapaksa has extended a fresh hand of friendship to the  minority Tamils, but most members of this community feel it will take a long  time for the wounds to heal after years of mistrust and alienation.  Mano Ganeshan, Tamil parliamentarian and leader of the Western People’s  Front (WPF), said that Rajapaksa clearly said in parliament that the war and  subsequent victory was against Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE)  guerrillas and not the Tamil people.  'However these pronouncements and  declarations should also be reflected on the ground,' he said, adding that in  a few areas, Tamils were subjected to intimidation and harassment during  widespread victory celebrations. Thousands of people across Sri Lanka - including in the Tamil-dominated  eastern region - have been singing and dancing in the streets after the  government declared at the weekend that the Tigers had been defeated and  that elusive rebel leader Velupillai Prabhakaran had been killed.  The scenes  were reminiscent of the fervour that erupted across the country when  cricket-crazy Sri Lanka won the World Cup in 1996 - even the rebels  celebrated at that time. 'Our aim was to liberate our Tamil people from the clutches of the LTTE.   Protecting the Tamil-speaking people of this country is my responsibility -  that is my duty,' Rajapaksa said, speaking in the Tamil language in the  opening part of his ‘victory’ speech in Parliament Tuesday.  'All the people of  this country should live in safety without fear and suspicion.  All should live  with equal rights. ' Wednesday was declared a national holiday to mark the  end of the war. But, Tamils say insecurity persists and the government needs to quickly win  the confidence of the people, otherwise the same old issues of discrimination  and uncertainty would remain.  'We are not the Tigers.  We don’t even support  them.  But more than fighting the Tigers, the government has been  suppressing ordinary Tamils.  We still live in fear,' a veteran academic, who  declined to be named, said by telephone from the northern, Tamil-dominated  town of Jaffna, once the seat of LTTE militancy. He said most shops in Jaffna were ‘asked’ to put up the national flag by local  authorities.  'Shopkeepers did - out of fear and not because of anything else. 'Ganeshan said Tamils need concrete assurances of safety, and clear  instructions must be given to the armed forces and the police to maintain law  and order.  He sees tackling the root cause of the problem as a priority,  saying, 'Tamil militancy began because of these issues and though the LTTE  has been defeated, these issues remain unresolved. 'Government troops - after a sustained, nearly 2-year campaign - crushed the  rebels in the north and east, ending the battle at the weekend by freeing  several civilians held against their will by the rebels, and by killing  Prabhakaran and several of his lieutenants including his son, Charles Anthony  who headed the group’s air force. Thousands of soldiers, rebels and civilians have died in the rebel campaign  for a separate homeland for minority Tamils, who form over 15 percent of Sri  Lanka’s population of 20 million.  The Tamils say they have been  discriminated against for over half a century in education, jobs and other  services by governments controlled by the majority Sinhalese community. Several rounds of peace talks, at different times since 1983, between the  government and militants, were held but ended with disagreement mostly by  the rebels. Nearly a million Tamils have gone abroad since 1983 to escape the violence  and many supported the Tigers through financial and other means.  In the  past few weeks as the war neared its end, Tiger supporters abroad launched  huge demonstrations outside the British Parliament and White House in the  U. S. Demonstrations and protests were also held in cities around the world by Sri  Lankan expats - both Tamil and Singhalese together - against alleged human  rights violations by both sides in the final days of the war.  A few Sri Lankan  overseas missions were also vandalised. Colombo has seen a flurry of world leaders in recent weeks, all trying to  persuade Rajapaksa to stop the war as innocent civilians were being harmed.   But Colombo wasn’t swayed and all these calls were rejected. Some 250,000 civilians - who fled the latest fighting - are housed in camps  in the northern town of Vavuniya and U. N.  Secretary General Ban Ki-moon is  flying to Sri Lanka Friday to visit these camps and assess the situation. Paikiasothy Saravanamuttu, executive director of the Centre for Policy  Alternatives (CPA), says the priority is to resolve the problems of people  (Internally Displaced Persons-IDPs) living in camps.  'There should be a quick  screening, registration and separation,' he said. While the screening is to separate civilians from rebel infiltrators, the  government has said at least 80 percent of the IDPs will be returned to their  homes by the end of 2009 after reconstruction and rehabilitation gets  underway.  A government task force was recently appointed to oversee the  rebuilding of the north. 'The other aspect is moving towards a speedy political settlement.  This is  imperative,' Saravanamuttu, also a political columnist, said, adding however  that, 'the Tamils will want their insecurity taken care of first. 'That’s what worries residents like the Jaffna academic.  'We need to be  trusted to make our own choices.  We shouldn’t be forced.  For example, some  of my business friends in Colombo have been asked by government agencies  to contribute financially to help the IDPs and are paying, with great difficulty,  the money,' he said.  'They do care but also fear that if they don’t donate,  they would be marginalised. 'A grouping of parties called the All Party Representatives Committee (APRC)  has been meeting for the past few years - since Rajapaksa won presidential  elections in November 2005 - to thrash out a political settlement to the  ethnic question. However the main opposition United National Party (UNP) and the Tamil  National Alliance (TNA) - the largest Tamil group in Parliament which has  been supporting the rebels - have boycotted the meetings and most people  believe it is unlikely to come up with a viable solution. Analysts also believe the government will hold local council elections in the  north and back anti-LTTE political parties to take control to ward off any  attempt by the Tigers or their proxies to secure a foothold.  There is also  speculation that Rajapaksa may either call early parliamentary or presidential  polls this year. 