Analysing the colonial and historical roots of the violence in Darfur, Mahmood  Mamdani concludes that the crisis in Darfur is not genocide, but a fight for  land, triggered by drought, which has been racialised by outside powers. Mamdani, a third-generation Ugandan of Indian descent is Hebert Lehman  Professor of Government and director of the Institute of African Studies, at  New York's Columbia University.  He launched his book, ‘Saviours and  Survivors.  Darfur, Politics and the War on Terror’ at the 2009 Cape Town  Book Fair on Jun.  16. IPS: Why did you decide to write a book about Darfur and not another  humanitarian crisis?Mahmood Mamdani: I went to Sudan in 2003 for a few weeks to meet  Sudanese intellectuals to get their sense of their society, the year the  insurgency in Darfur began.  A year later, Darfur was big news, very different  from any [other conflict] on the continent.  Even Rwanda hadn’t been that  big news until the genocide was over.  The answer was very simple: Darfur  was the focus of a domestic movement in the United States, the Save Darfur  movement. In 2006, I began to get the backdrop when the GAO [United States  Government Accountability Office] found that the mortality estimates of the  Save Darfur movement of 400,000 deaths were the least reliable, because it  took figures from an unrepresentative sample, while the most reliable figure  came from the World Health Organisation, which said about 112,000 people  had died. When reading the reports, I realised that those who died had not necessarily  been killed.  The major cause of death was drought and desertification,  which killed between 70,000 and 80,000 people, mainly children, while only  about 35,000 people did of violence.  There was a gap between what was  made public and what was happening on the ground.  The Save Darfur  publicity was simply about violence.  Nothing told you why the violence was  happening.  I realised that the violence had begun in 1987-89 with the drought.  And  then the big powers got involved in the mid-80s.  When [former president  Ronald] Reagan came to power in the United States, he declared Libya a  terrorist state, and the Cold War began to focus on Chad.  The US, France  and Israel supported one side in the Chad, while Libya and the Soviet Union  supported the other side.  The [US-led] opposition was armed and trained in  Darfur.  So when the drought happened in Darfur in the mid-80s, the place  was awash with guns. IPS: The main premise of your book is that the context of the crisis in Darfur  cannot be called genocide.  How did you come to this conclusion?MM: I’m saying several things.  We, the human rights movement, ignore  issues and just focus on identifying violations, the perpetrator, the victim.   We specialise in naming and shaming the perpetrator, and we demand  criminal justice.  In all this, what’s lost is a sense of the issues that are  driving the violence.  Violence has a history.  In Darfur, it was driven in the context of a drought  and a land settlement, which was as old as the colonial period when the  British had created tribal lands.  There was no land given to Nomadic tribes.   So when the drought came, they had no fallback.  So [the crisis] was land- driven.  It wasn’t about race, but it began to get racialised.  When the external  agencies came in, they just assumed this was a conflict between Arab tribes  and non-Arab tribes, and in this context the Arabs were the perpetrators  and the non-Arabs were the victims.  But the issue of land remained  unaddressed.  IPS: You say the West’s humanitarian intervention is a cover for military  invasion.  What facts do you base this assumption on?MM: Initially, I thought Save Darfur was another classic peace movement in  the US.  But I realised that Save Darfur was a war mobilisation.  It’s slogans  were ‘Out of Iraq into Darfur’, ‘Boots on the Ground’, ‘No Fly Zone’.  Its  emphasis was to never focus on the issues that were driving the violence.   The entire focus was to demonise the perpetrator.  This emphasis was very much like the War on Terror, which said that any  attempt to talk about issues was an apology for the perpetrator.  Darfur was  just a place where evil lived.  They think if you do away with the perpetrator,  the violence will stop.  Yet the violence will go on, because the issues remain.   If you understand the history of war, you understand victims and  perpetrators are on the same side, and sometimes victims and perpetrators  are the same people. IPS: What is the post-Cold War international order and how does it related  to the crisis in Darfur?MM: If you think of the African conflicts that have found some kind of a  solution, you realise that in all these cases, you had to move away from  criminalising the opposition to seeing this as a political conflict driven by  certain issues.  The best example to me was the solution to apartheid in  [South Africa]. This had also worked in Mozambique and in south Sudan.  There had not  been court trials, but political reform.  We have to accept the possibility that  both sides may have committed crimes, and if we agree on political  reforms, we [let go of] the crimes so that we can have a fresh beginning  and a rule of law whereby everybody can be held accountable.  That’s the  way to go. IPS: Is there a hidden agenda to re-colonise Africa?MM: We know there is greater attention on Africa today than there was ten  years ago.  We know the US is not the single global power.  There are new  powers on the horizon, like China.  The contest between the US and China  globally is focused on Africa.  And in Africa, it’s focused on particular  countries, and Sudan is one of them.  It’s about natural resources, without a  doubt.  The US is neck-deep in Chad, for oil and uranium, and China is neck-deep  in Sudan for the same reasons.  The contention of the two of them is  unavoidable.  But hopefully, with the Obama administration, there is a more  sober assessment of American power and therefore a more sober realisation  that the US has to learn to co-exist in the world.  It can’t just call the shots.   And I think we’ll be seeing this in terms of a new global attitude inside  Africa. IPS: Is Africa’s independence at stake? What should be the African Union’s  response?MM: The level of death and killing went down dramatically in Darfur after  September 2004, to less than 200 a month.  The main credit goes to the  African Union (AU) because it figured out that the way to end the fighting  was to put in place a political process, which would make negotiations and  discussions possible. But the AU was sabotaged consistently.  The West, which is the Europeans,  the Canadians, the Americans, agreed to fit the bill for the AU soldiers, and  Africa agreed to provide the bodies on the ground, but [the West] never  footed the bill.  Still, the AU has come out with some credibility.  They have done much  better than the UN.  It was scepticism about the AU and the suggested  political settlement, and huge scepticism about Africa being able to find its  own solutions.  Those who agreed to the AU coming in did it full of  scepticism, as a temporary measure, simply because the West was not  willing or ready to come in.  Therefore they never provided the resources they said they were going to  provide and never honoured the conditions they said they were going to  honour.  It became a self-fulfilling prophecy.  But still, the AU has done the  most credible job of anybody in Sudan in that short space of time. IPS: Your book ends with a proposal for a triple solution: regionally  negotiated peace, combined with power reform in Sudan and land and  governance reform in Darfur.  Why do you think this would work?MM: There are several lessons here.  One, you can’t get big powers to come  and solve your problems.  If you need external involvement to solve a  conflict, it is best if that involvement comes from your neighbours through  an organised arrangement, either regional or continental.  They will have a  real interest in making peace in that country, because they will always be  neighbours.  Second, Sudan needs power reforms like most countries becoming newly  independent.  You cannot expect a full-blown democracy being delivered in  the womb of a colony.  It’s absurd.  Creating representative power takes  internal struggles.  The most intractable will be the land question.  Partly because it’s embedded  in the tribal settlement of land that came out of the colonial period and  then in the notions of absolute ownership of land.  