WASHINGTON, Jun 28 (IPS)  - This month's stunning campaign by Sunni insurgents led by the radical Islamic State of Syria and the Levant (ISIL) against the mainly Shi'a government of Iraqi President Nouri Al-Maliki is stoking a growing debate here about the hierarchy of threats facing the United States in the Middle East and beyond. On one side, many foreign policy "realists" have argued that the greatest threat is precisely the kind of violent Sunni jihadism associated with Al Qaeda, whose prominence, however, now appears to have been eclipsed by the even more violent ISIL. 3In their view, Washington should be ready, if not eager, to cooperate with Iran, which, like the U. S. , has rushed military advisers, weapons, and even drone aircraft to Baghdad, in order to protect the Iraqi government and help organise a counter-offensive to regain lost territory. Some voices in this camp even favour working with Syrian President Bashar Al-Assad, whose air force reportedly bombed ISIL positions inside Iraq Wednesday, to help repel the threat. "There's only one strategy with a decent chance of winning: forge a military and political coalition with the power to stifle the jihadis in both Iraq and Syria," according to the former president of the influential Council on Foreign Relations, Leslie Gelb. "This means partnering with Iran, Russia, and President Assad of Syria.  This would be a very tricky arrangement among unfriendly and non-trusting partners, but the overriding point is that they all have common interests," he wrote in The Daily Beast. On the other side, pro-Israel neo-conservatives and aggressive nationalists, who maintain their hold -- if increasingly shakily -- on the Republican Party, vehemently oppose any such cooperation, insisting that Tehran poses Washington's greatest strategic threat, especially if it succeeds in what they depict as its determination to obtain nuclear weapons. For them, talk of any cooperation with either Syria or Iran, which they accuse of having supported Al Qaeda and other Sunni jihadist groups in the past, is anathema. "(W)e should not aid our stronger adversary power against our weaker adversary power in the struggle underway in Iraq," according to George W.  Bush's ambassador to the U. N. , John Bolton, now with the American Enterprise Institute. "U. S.  strategy must rather be to prevent Tehran from re-establishing its scimitar of power stretching from Iran through Iraq and Syria to Lebanon," he wrote for FoxNews in an op-ed that called for renewed U. S.  efforts to overthrow "the ayatollahs". The hawks have instead urged, among other things, Washington to deploy special operations forces and airpower to attack ISIL in both Iraq and Syria while substantially boosting military aid to "moderate" rebel factions fighting to oust Assad. Yet a third camp argues that the current fixation on ISIL -- not to say, the 13-year-old pre-occupation with the Middle East more generally -- is overdrawn and misplaced and that Washington needs to engage a serious threat re-assessment and prioritise accordingly. Noting disappointingly that Obama himself had identified "terrorism" as the greatest threat to the U. S.  in a major foreign policy speech last month, political theorist Francis Fukuyama cited Russia's recent annexation of Crimea and increased tensions over maritime claims between China and its U. S. -allied neighbours as greater causes for concern. "He said virtually nothing about long-term responses to the two other big challenges to world order: Russia and China," Fukuyama wrote in a Financial Times column entitled "ISIS risks distracting us from more menacing foes. "In the face of ISIL's advance, the administration appears to lean toward the "realist" camp, but, for a variety of reasons feels constrained in moving more decisively in its direction. Indeed, at the outset of the crisis, both Obama and his secretary of state, John Kerry, made clear that they were open to at least consulting, if not cooperating with Tehran in dealing with the ISIL threat. Kerry even sent his top deputy, William Burns, to explore those possibilities in a meeting with senior Iranian officials on the sidelines of nuclear negotiations in Vienna – the highest-level bilateral talks about regional-security issues the two governments have held in memory. But the sudden emergence of a possible de facto U. S. -Iranian partnership propelled its many foes into action. These included not only neo-conservatives and other anti-Iran hawks, including the powerful Israel lobby here, but also Washington's traditional regional allies, including Israel itself, as well as Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates (UAE). They have long feared a return to the pre-1979 era when Washington recognised Tehran as the Gulf's pre-eminent power and, in any case, have repeatedly ignored U. S.  appeals in the past to reconcile themselves to a new Iraq in which the majority Shi'a community will no longer accept Sunni predominance. "Some  worry that the U. S.  is seeking a new alliance with Iran to supplant its old alliance system in the region," wrote Michael Singh, a former Bush Middle East aide now with the pro-Israel Washington Institute for Near Policy (WINEP), on the same day of the Vienna meeting. "As misplaced as these worries may be, an American embrace of an Iranian security role in Iraq – or even bilateral talks with Iran on regional security that exclude other stakeholders – will only exacerbate them," he warned in the neo-conservative editorial pages of the Wall Street Journal which has published a flood of op-eds and editorials over the past two weeks opposing any cooperation with Iran on Iraq. Faced with these pressures, Obama, who has vowed to keep the U. S.  out of a regional Sunni-Shi'a civil war, is eager to reassure those allies that he has no intention of partnering with Iran to save Maliki himself (to whom the Iranians appear to remain committed, at least for now). U. S.  officials have made no secret of their preference for a less-sectarian leader who is capable of reaching out to the Sunni community in Iraq in ways that could prise it loose from ISIL's grip or influence. That no doubt was a major part of the message conveyed by Kerry – along with the dangers posed by ISIL, even to Saudi Arabia itself -- in his meeting in Jeddah Friday with King Abdullah, who until now has clearly viewed Tehran as the greater threat. Similarly, the White House announcement Thursday that it will ask Congress to approve a whopping 500 million dollars in military and other assistance to "moderate" rebel groups in Syria to fight both Assad and ISIL also appeared designed to reassure the Saudis and its Gulf allies that Washington remains responsive to their interests, even if the aid is unlikely to materialise before some time next year. While that announcement may please U. S.  hawks and Washington's traditional allies in the region, it is unlikely to strengthen those in Tehran who favour cooperating with the U. S.  on regional security issues.  Indeed, it risks bolstering hard-liners who see the conflict in both Iraq and Syria in sectarian terms and accuse Washington of siding with their Sunni rivals in the Gulf. That the announcement was made on the same day that Baghdad thanked Damascus for bombing ISIL positions in Iraq, however, illustrates the complexities of the tangled alliances at play and the urgent questions for U. S.  policy-makers: who is the greatest threat and who best to work with in defeating it?Jim Lobe's blog on U. S.  foreign policy can be read at Lobelog. com. 