WASHINGTON, Jul 29 (IPS)  - As the killing and destruction rages on in Gaza, and as Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu and the Hamas leadership exchange recriminations and threats, key regional and world players must accept a central truism: No peace can be achieved between Israel and the Palestinians without including Hamas.  The quicker they internalise this fact, the faster the cycle of violence can be broken. gaza 2 640The Gaza wars have failed to liquidate Hamas; on the contrary, Hamas has emerged stronger and better equipped despite the pummeling it frequently receives from Israel. 3At the same time, Israel's assault on Gaza reflects Tel Aviv's concern about the region as a whole, not just about Hamas.  Such concerns are driven by the rise of Islamic radicalism in Gaza and across the region, the growing influence of right-wing radical Jewish groups and political movements in Israel, the brutal civil war in Syria, the collapsing state structures in Libya and Yemen, a failing state in Iraq, the marginalisation of the Palestinian Authority (PA) leadership in Ramallah, and the fragile political systems in Lebanon and Jordan. Israeli worries also stem from a resurgent Iran, a potential nuclear agreement between Iran and world powers, and the perceived diminishing influence of the United States across the region.  Unable to influence these "seismic shifts" in the region, Israel has resisted any long-term workable accommodation with the Palestinians as well as ending its occupation of Arab lands. The Obama administration and other governments must work to end the 47-year-old occupation of the West bank and the blockade of Gaza.  The Gaza Strip is considered the world's largest open-air prison, blockaded on three sides by Israel and on one side by Egypt.  This economic and political encirclement must be broken if the economic and social conditions of Gazan residents are to improve. Poverty, unemployment, poor health and hygiene, and a lack of power and clean water have generated anger and hopelessness, which have often resulted in the frequent firing of rockets toward Israel.  While mostly ineffective, these rockets have terrorised Israeli residents in the southern part of the country.  This too must stop. The bloody confrontations between West Bank Palestinians and the Israeli forces in Jerusalem at the Kalandia crossing, and between Arabs in Israel and Israeli police demonstrate that the Gaza war has spread to other parts of Palestine.  This bodes ill for Israel and neighbouring countries. Israel's glee at the Egyptian government and media's enmity toward Hamas is ephemeral and transitory.  The Sisi autocratic regime would be unable to withstand its people and other Arabs' anger at what they view as Israeli aggression against the Palestinians. Having followed this conflict, including the rise of Hamas, for decades, both in academia and in government, and having briefed senior officials on these issues for years, I argue that long-lasting peace between Israelis and Palestinians will remain elusive unless regional and global leaders begin to re-examine their decades-old assumptions about the conflict. Such a step would be severely criticized by partisans from, and on behalf of, both sides, including many in the U. S.  Congress.  Therefore, courage, perseverance, and new thinking are needed to empower stakeholders to push the process forward. Hamas and IsraelDestroying Gaza, killing thousands of innocent civilians, blowing up Hamas tunnels, and liquidating its leaders will not eradicate Hamas or silence its drive against the Israeli blockade.  Hamas draws strength not from its religious ideology but from its resistance to the encirclement, which has strangled and impoverished most of the 1. 6 million Palestinians in the Gaza Strip. The current Israeli war on Gaza plus the two previous ones in 2008-9 and 2012 have not really been about the perceived existential threat Hamas poses to Israel.  These conflicts have been rooted in the failure of the so-called peace process. The asymmetry between Israel's military might and Hamas' weaponry, which includes homemade and home-upgraded rockets, cannot possibly allow Hamas to pose a credible mortal threat to Israel. The terrorising of civilians along the Gaza-Israel border is abhorrent and must not be tolerated, but it is also not an existential threat to Israel, nor does it justify Israel's massive bombardment of residential neighbourhoods, hospitals, and schools in Gaza City and across the strip.  Israel could easily destroy the tunnels on both sides of the border without destroying thousands of homes and reducing Gaza to rubble. The Israeli assault could also be seen as a response to the recent reconciliation between the PA administration in Ramallah and Hamas in Gaza and the formation of a Palestinian national unity government of technocrats.  The support the U. S.  and EU showed for the new Palestinian government concerned Netanyahu deeply, and he proceeded to torpedo it.  Netanyahu's Gaza war belies his claim that he was genuinely looking for a so-called Palestinian "partner. "Precursor to Hamas' TunnelsThe Bush administration and the Israeli government supported holding elections in Gaza in January 2006, which Hamas won fairly and convincingly.  Both Washington and Tel Aviv were stunned by the results and proceeded to delegitimise the election results and torpedo the new Hamas administration. Gazans voted for Hamas not because of its religious ideology but because of its community service and resistance to the Israeli blockade.  The legendary corruption of the PA administration in Ramallah also underpinned the vote for Hamas. The morning after the election, a few senior members of the Bush administration advocated giving Hamas a chance to engage Israel on practical issues, including travel permits, the power grid, water, and commerce.  If Hamas failed to do so within a couple of months, these officials argued, the United States and Israel would pull the rug from under Hamas. That argument, which according to media reports at the time, was favoured by President Bush, lasted for one day.  The counter argument favouring an immediate isolation of Hamas, which was strongly advocated by neoconservatives in the United States and in Israel, carried the day. The Gaza wars in 2008-9, 2012, and now are arguably a direct result of the refusal of Israel and the United States to accept the 2006 election results and engage Hamas.  Had engagement occurred, the living standards of Gazans would have improved markedly; there would have been no need for a "tunnel economy" or a "tunnel military. "Unfortunately, Israeli politicians today seem to be viewing Hamas and the continued occupation and encirclement through the same narrow prism of 2006. The Way ForwardIn a recent article I argued the two-state solution was dead and called for new thinking.  The same applies to the current conflict. After 47 years of occupation, nine years of blockading Gaza, two intifadas, and three wars, Israel, the Palestinians, and the United States must accept the fact that war, terrorism, and occupation cannot solve the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. With the death of the two-state option, the peaceful coexistence of Israelis and Palestinians between the Mediterranean Sea and the Jordan River can only be achieved through a new paradigm grounded in justice, human dignity, equality, and tolerance. Including Hamas in talks for an enduring end to the conflict could be done through a joint Palestinian delegation comprised of the PA, Hamas, and other factions.  For this approach to succeed, however, it must include an end to the blockade of Gaza. Once the two peoples living together embark on this path, they will reject the logic of occupation and terrorism and focus on building a more hopeful future. For its part, the United States should jettison all futile attempts to push for a so-called peace process.  Rather, we should begin serious efforts to help the two peoples operationalise the new paradigm. Emile Nakhleh is a Research Professor at the University of New Mexico, a member of the Council on Foreign Relations, and author of "A Necessary Engagement