BELFAST, Aug 18 (IPS)  - I once asked Dan Berrigan, the great American anti-war activist, for some advice to me in my life as a peace activist.  He replied "Pray and Resist". But I would like to ask how serious we are about resistance? What is our vision? And how does resistance fit into this? What do we need to resist? How can we resist effectively? And what methods are allowed? In resisting, what are our aims and objectives? Mairead MaguireI would like to propose that the world's peace movement adopt a vision of the total abolition of militarism.  Such a vision would empower us to know where we are going.  It would inspire and energise each of us to pursue our different projects, be it the fight against the arms trade, nuclear abolition, non-killing/non-violence, the culture of peace, the abolition of arms and drone warfare, human rights and environmental rights. We will know, as we work towards this vision of a demilitarised, disarmed world, that we are part of an ever-growing new ‘consciousness' of men and women, choosing to uphold human life, the right to individual conscience, loving our enemies, human rights and international law, and solving our problems without killing each other. Why resist militarism? We are witnessing the growing militarism of Europe, and its role as a driving force for armaments, and its dangerous path, under the leadership of the United States/NATO towards a new ‘cold war' and military aggression. The European Union and many of its countries, which used to take initiatives in the United Nations for peaceful settlements of conflicts, particularly allegedly peaceful countries like Norway and Sweden, are now among the most important U. S. /NATO war assets. 3The European Union is a threat to the survival of neutrality, as countries are being asked to join NATO, and forced to end their neutrality and choose (unnecessarily) between West and East. Many nations have been drawn into complicity in breaking international law through U. S. /U. K. /NATO wars in Afghanistan, Iraq, Libya, and so on, Germany, the third largest exporter of military hardware in the world, continues to increase its military budget and is complicit with NATO, facilitating U. S.  bases, from which drones leave to carry out illegal extrajudicial killings on the order of the U. S.  president, in countries such as Afghanistan and Pakistan. Germany has also provided Israel with its nuclear submarine and continues to be complicit under the Geneva Convention in Israeli war crimes against Gaza and in the illegal occupation of Palestine. We need to abolish NATO and increase our task of dismantling the military-industrial complex, through non-violent and civil resistance. The means of resistance are very important.  As a pacifist deeply committed to non-killing/non-violence as a way to bring about social/cultural/political change, I believe that we need to use means consistent with the end, and it is wrong to use violence. Our message that militarism and war do not solve our problem of violence challenges us to use new ways and that is why we need to teach the science of peace at every level of society. We are all aware there are forces at work which are determined to continue their agenda of the militarisation of our societies and there are governments/corporate/media attempts to make violence and war acceptable. The greatest danger to our freedoms being eroded by governments and endangered by ‘armed' groups is a fearful, apathetic, civil community, refusing to take a stand for human rights and real democracy, and against violence and war. We can take hope from the fact that most people want peace not war.  However, we are facing a civilisation problem.  We are facing a political/ideological challenge with the growth of what president Ike Eisenhower warned the U. S.  people against ­– the military/industrial complex.  He warned that it would destroy the United States. We know now that a small group made up of the world's military/industrial/media/corporate/academic elite – whose agenda is profit, arms, war and
valuable resources – now holds power and has a stronghold on our elected governments.  We see this in the gun and Israeli lobbies, among others, which hold great power over U. S.  politics. We have witnessed this in ongoing wars, invasions, occupations and proxy war, all allegedly in the name of ‘humanitarian intervention and democracy'.  However, in reality, they are causing great suffering, especially to the poor, through their policies of arms, war, domination and control of other countries and their resources. Unmasking this agenda of war and demanding the implementation of human rights and international law is the work of the peace movement.  We can turn away from this path of destruction by spelling out a clear vision of what kind of a world we want to live in, demanding an end to the military-industrial complex, and insisting that our governments adopt policies of peace. We, the Peace Movement, are the alternative to militarism and war, and because we want a different world, we must be part of building it.  We must not be satisfied with improvements to and reform of militarism but rather offer an alternative. Militarism is an aberration and a system of dysfunction.  Militarism should be outdated and disappear – like hanging and flogging! (END/IPS COLUMNIST SERVICE)(Edited by Phil Harris)