JOHANNESBURG, Sep 02 (IPS)  - The killings of hundreds of civilians, including scores of children, in Gaza – whose only fault was to have been born on the wrong side of the wall – was a major point of contention at the United Nations Human Rights Council at the end of July. The high death toll caused by indiscriminate bombing of civilian areas by the Israeli military has resulted in what may very likely be war crimes.  The United Nations has said that 443 (over 70 percent) of those killed in Gaza were civilians.  Mandeep TiwanaYet Western democracies, normally proactive on human rights issues at the Council, chose to withhold their vote when a resolution urging immediate cessation of Israeli military assaults throughout the Occupied Territories, including East Jerusalem, and an end to attacks against all civilians, including Israeli civilians, was brought forward. Notably, the resolution sought to create an independent international commission of inquiry to investigate all violations of international human rights and humanitarian law in the context of military operations conducted since June 13, 2014. When asked to vote on the above, Austria, France, Ireland, Italy, Germany and the United Kingdom chose to abstain.  The United States, whose foreign policy mission is to "shape and sustain a peaceful, prosperous, just and democratic world and foster conditions for stability and progress for the benefit of the American people and people everywhere," was ironically the only country in the 47 member U. N.  Human Rights Council to have voted against the resolution. 3Essentially, each country standing for election to the Human Rights Council is required to "uphold the highest standards in the promotion and protection of human rights. " By any yardstick, looking at the wanton death and destruction that has rained down on the people of Gaza, destroying the homes and livelihoods of tens of thousands as well as vital public infrastructure, is a blatant abdication of responsibility. In 2006, when the Human Rights Council was created, then U. N.  Secretary General Kofi Annan poignantly remarked that the true test of its ability would be the use that member states make of it.  Eight years down the line, sadly the Council remains a house divided on the great human rights matters of the day. Earlier this year in March, when the Human Rights Council passed a resolution aimed at addressing impunity for the widespread violations of international law committed during and after the Sri Lankan civil war, many of the countries strongly in favour of accountability for crimes committed in the Gaza conflict – such as Algeria, China, Cuba, Pakistan, Russia, Saudi Arabia, Venezuela and Viet Nam – voted against the Sri Lanka resolution.  Conversely, Western democracies that abstained on the Gaza vote robustly supported action to tackle impunity in Sri Lanka. This double standard represents perhaps the greatest challenge to the world's premier human rights body. Notably, the Human Rights Council was established in response to well-founded criticism of rampant politicisation of human rights issues by its predecessor, the Commission on Human Rights.   At the Human Rights Council too, geopolitical interests of the more powerful states are driving selective blocking and support for human rights causes by elected member states, weakening respect for international standards.  Notably, the formation of blocs presents a grave threat to the Council's work.  Its members have unfortunately slotted themselves into various informal groups such as the Western European and Others Group (WEOG),  African Group, Organisation of Islamic Conference (OIC) countries, and even a motley ‘Like-Minded Group' that shares little in political culture and world view except that it largely opposes whatever the Western group comes up with. These unfortunate political dynamics have weakened the ability of the Council to be a beacon for the advancement of human rights discourse.  Tellingly, the issue of discrimination against and violations of the personal freedoms of sexual minorities including lesbian, gay, bisexual and transsexual (LGBT) individuals remains another hotly contested area. A regressively worded June 2014 resolution on the ‘protection of the family' – which excludes LGBT individuals from the ambit of the family – witnessed en-masse voting in favour by the African, OIC and ‘Like-Minded Group'. Worryingly, far too many countries are caught up in the herd mentality of en-masse voting coupled with advancement of strategic interests at the Human Rights Council.  Too often, principle is being abandoned at the altar of politics.  Every time this happens, the legitimacy of the global governance institution suffers, further exacerbating conflict. A report by the global civil society alliance, CIVICUS, points out that in an ever more complex governance environment, where large problems are acknowledged to cross national borders, international level decision-making is starting to matter more. Institutions of global governance should be able to offer a source of protection and support for people who are being repressed, marginalised or excluded at the national level.  Yet, too often, they are captured by state interests which override genuine human rights concerns. Civil society and the media have their work cut out to expose the hypocrisy and inconsistency that mars action on gross human rights violations in international forums like the Human Rights Council.  States need to be held accountable and practice what they preach – on principle, and not only when it suits them.  (END/IPS COLUMNIST SERVICE)(Edited by Phil Harris)