OSLO, Sep 18 (IPS)  - New military measures to deter what NATO perceives to be a direct threat from Russia were adopted at the alliance's Heads of State meeting in Wales (Sep.  4-5).  A few days earlier, President Barack Obama made promises in Estonia that the three tiny Baltic NATO member states would "never stand alone".  Since early 2014, Russia has done practically all that Western leaders have warned President Vladimir Putin in advance not to do.  Crimea was occupied and annexed.  Pro-Russian separatists in eastern Ukraine were encouraged and given practical support.  Later, Russian personnel and equipment came more and more openly into conflict with Ukrainian forces.  Helge LurasBut the West's warnings to Russia did not stop there.  Already several months ago, establishment figures and the media began to associate events in Ukraine directly with the situation in the Baltics and in Poland.  NATO has responded to the Russian offensive against Ukraine, a non-NATO country, by shifting military resources towards the areas of NATO that it claims, but only by conjecture, are threatened by Russia. But did anyone at the NATO summit warn that the alliance might create a self-fulfilling prophecy? Did anyone have the foresight to consider how tensions between Russian speakers and Estonians, Latvians and Lithuanians might increase as a result of the hyperbole of the Russian threat? One should not assume hostile intentions in today's ethnically-charged world without good reason. That some Western minds consider themselves, and by extension NATO, to be an idealistic force for peace, human rights and democracy, is beyond dispute.  But the reality is that NATO countries – that is, the West – represent the world's most powerful military force, both conventional and nuclear. Up to now, NATO has not challenged another nuclear armed entity and therefore has survived its own political-military escalation tendency.  But in the case of Russia, the erroneous Western perception of self could cause a catastrophic and total war. Since the Cold War, the West has swallowed up a large area formerly under the influence, if not outright control, of Soviet Russia.  The hegemonic mind saw this as just natural and of no business to an anachronism like Russia. 3The future of humanity when expansion started in the 1990s was a Western future: liberal, democratic and free-market.  Spheres of influence were the hallmark of others, exemplified by "reactionary" and authoritarian forces like Russia under Putin.  Western influence is in another category – it is natural if not God-given. In Russia, there is a clear and evolving bias in news reporting which the West characterises as "propaganda".  In the West, there is less need to instruct the media directly, there is a reverse bias due to cultural indoctrination.  Evidently the West is a keeper of the right values.  There is no cause and effect.  Evil just pops up.  All things Russian are bad, deceitful, not to be trusted.  But in Russia this feeds an undeniable paranoia in the psyche. The West has retained one "acceptable" bogeyman in the atmosphere of religious tolerance that creates such cognitive dissonance as it struggles to come to grips with core tenets of original (radical) Islam.  The Western "liberal mind" has at least one cultural object left to legitimately hate: Russian political culture and the strong man it produces. The problem is that Russian and NATO leaders are not drunken poets pathetically fighting with untrained fists at a literary reception.  They may act so, but are in fact front men of substantive and institutional systems that can wipe out all human civilisation in a short time. Western leaders undoubtedly perceive that their power is waning.  No more state-building in faraway countries for us.  The end of omnipotence, indeed of paradigm, is obviously traumatic and difficult to consider with a cool mind.  But the diminution of Western political power occurs with no corresponding weakness in pure military muscle. This leaves the temptation of a "Mad Man Doctrine".  If you can convince your opponent that you are willing to react disproportionately to what is at stake for you, he will fear you beyond the otherwise sensible.  Everyone treats a mad man with caution. In Ukraine, there is more at stake for Russia than for the West.  Therefore Russia, as it has also shown, will not give up or allow itself or its allies to lose.  In the Baltic countries, there is also more at stake for Russia than for the United States and for most other NATO countries as well. For, in the post-Cold War, Russia has no ideology beyond nationalism.  Its most ambitious claims, even if unopposed, would come to a halt at the geographical outer limits of the ethnic Russian nation. This is not to say that Russian nationalism could not become a factor of instability beyond Ukraine.  Trouble is latent.  The partly Russian-populated Baltic countries are now in NATO, and NATO is an institutionalised form of the Mad Man Doctrine.  The danger of miscalculating the reaction for NATO as well as for Russia is therefore significant. Little suggests that the West understand how risky the games in progress really are.  NATO and Russia are nuclear powers.  Sensible leaders on both sides understood as much during the Cold War.  Nuclear powers must not go to war with each other.  If at all, the conflicts must remain by proxy.  Such insights must be rediscovered today. NATO should concentrate on finding a way to downplay the conflict with Russia, compromise on Ukraine, and not follow what the United States seem intent on doing; escalating, increasing defence spending across the bloc, sending more troops to the Baltic countries.  Appeasement, if the starting point is dumb-headed NATO-expansionism, can be a virtue as well as a vice. Military means are already at play in the conflict between NATO and Russia.  Some call for even more.  Before pushing Russia further in the direction they claim not to want - ethnic expansionism - politicians in the West must remember that nuclear arms are the last weapons in the arsenal of both. Luckily, Putin seems quite sane, with superior rationality to many of his Western counterparts.  The irresponsible comparison between Putin and Hitler is therefore wrong in many respects, but not least because Hitler never had the bomb.  (END/IPS COLUMNIST SERVICE)(Edited by Phil Harris)