WASHINGTON, Sep 18 (IPS)  - As the wobbly anti-ISIS coalition is being formed with American prodding, the Obama administration should take a strategic look at the future of the Arab world beyond the threat posed by the self-declared Islamic State.  Otherwise, the United States would be unprepared to deal with the unintended chaos. Driven by ideological hubris, the Bush administration on the eve of the Iraq war rejected any suggestions that the war could destabilise the whole region and rock the foundations of the Arab nation-state system. 3That system, which was mostly created under the colonial Sykes-Picot treaty of 1916, is now being severely stressed.  The Obama administration should avoid repeating the tragic mistake of its predecessor.  While trying to halt the advance of ISIS by focused airstrikes, and regardless of the coalition's effectiveness in "degrading" and "defeating" ISIS, President Obama should instruct his senior policymakers to explore possible architectures that could emerge from the ashes of Sykes-Picot. The stresses and fault lines we are witnessing in the region today could easily lead to implosions tomorrow.  Rightly or wrongly, Washington would be blamed for the ensuing mayhem. As Secretary of State John Kerry shuttles between countries chasing the elusive coalition to fight ISIS, the administration seems to be unclear even about terminology.  Is it a war or a multifaceted counter-terrorism strategy against ISIS? Whatever it's called, if this strategy fails to eradicate the Islamic State and its Caliphate, is there a "Plan B" in the making?Briefing senior policymakers on the eve of the Iraq war, I pointed out the possible unintended consequences of the invasion.  George Tenet, former CIA director, alludes to several of these briefings in his book, "At the Center of the Storm. "One of the briefings discussed the possibility that the Iraq invasion could fundamentally unsettle the 100-year old Arab nation-state system.  National identity politics, which heretofore has been managed and manipulated by autocratic regimes—tribal, dynastic, monarchical, and presidential—could unravel if the Bush administration failed to anticipate what could happen following Saddam's demise. The artificiality of much of those states and their boundaries would come unhinged under the pressures of the invasion and the unleashing of internal forces that have been dormant.  National loyalties would be replaced by religious and sectarian affiliations, and the Shia-Sunni disputes that go back to the 7th century would once again rise to the surface albeit with more violence and bloodshed. The briefings also emphasised Iraq's central Islamic dilemma.  While for many Sunni Muslims Baghdad represents the golden age of Islam more than 1,200 years ago, Iraq is also the cradle of Shia Islam. Najaf and Karbala in southern Iraq are sacred for the Shia world because it was there where the fourth Caliph Ali's son Hussein was "martyred" and buried.  Iran, as the self-proclaimed voice of Shia Islam all over the world, is deeply embedded in Iraq and will always demand a central role in the future of Iraq. Bush administration senior policymakers ignored these warnings, arguing Iraqis and other Muslim Arabs would view American and coalition forces as "liberators" and, once the dictator fell, would work together in a spirit of tolerance, inclusion, and compromise.  This view, unfortunately, was grounded in the neocons' imagined ideological perception of the region.  As we now know, it was utterly ignorant of ground truths and the social fabric of the different Arab Islamic societies. Many Bush White House and Defense Department policymakers generally dismissed briefings that focused on the "morning after. " It's safe to say they cared less about the post-Saddam Middle East than about toppling the dictator. The region still suffers from those disastrous policies. ISIS did not emerge in a vacuum, and its transnational ideology, warped as it may be, seems to appeal to Arabs and Muslims who have become disenchanted with the existing political order in Arab lands. Many citizens view their states as fiefdoms of the ruling elites with no genuine respect for individual rights, personal freedoms, and human dignity.  The "securitisation" of politics has alienated many young Arabs and is driving them toward extremism. If the borders between Syria and Iraq are erased by the transnational "Caliphate," what will become of the borders of Lebanon, Jordan, Syria, and Iraq? Is the Obama administration ready to pick up the pieces when these nation-states disintegrate?These are the critical questions the Bush administration should have pondered and answered before they invaded Iraq.  They are the same questions the Obama administration should ponder and answer before unleashing American air power over the skies of the Levant. Invading Iraq was a "dumb" war.  Chasing after ISIS in the Iraqi/Syrian desert without a clear vision of the endgame could result in something far worse. Edited by Kitty StappThe views expressed in this article are those of the author and do not necessarily represent the views of, and should not be attributed to, IPS-Inter Press Service. 