GENEVA, Sep 18 (IPS)  - Amid escalating conflicts and rampant violations of human rights all over the world, spreading "human rights education" is not an easy task.  But a non-governmental organisation from Japan is beginning to make an impact through its "global citizenship education" approach. At the current annual meeting of the United Nations Human Rights Council, which began on Sep.  8, two side events marked the beginning of what promises to be a sustained campaign to spread human rights education (HRE). Alongside the first, the launch of the web resource "The Right to Human Rights Education" by the Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights, a special workshop was also convened on HRE for media professionals and journalists. The workshop was an initiative of the NGO Working Group on HRE chaired by Soka Gakkai International (SGI), a prominent NGO from Japan fighting for the abolition of nuclear weapons, sustainable development and human rights education. 3"This is the first time that the NGO Working Group on Human Rights Education and Learning and a group of seven countries representing the Platform for Human Rights Education and Training have organised a workshop on human rights education for media professionals and journalists," said Kazunari Fujii, SGI's Geneva representative. Fujii has been working among human rights pressure groups in Geneva to mobilise support for intensifying HRE campaigning.  "Through the promotion of human rights education, SGI wants to foster a culture of human rights that prevents violations from occurring in the first place," Fujii told IPS after the workshop on Tuesday (Sep.  16). "While protection of human rights is the core objective of the U. N.  Charter, it is equally important to prevent the occurrence of human rights abuses," he argued. Citing SGI President Daisaku Ikeda's central message to foster a "culture of human rights", Fujii said his mission in Geneva is to bring about solidarity among NGOs for achieving SGI's major goals on human rights, nuclear disarmament and sustainable development. The current session of the Human Rights Council, which will end on Sep.  26, is grappling with a range of festering conflicts in different parts of the world.  "From a human rights perspective, it is clear that the immediate and urgent priority of the international community should be to halt the increasingly conjoined conflicts in Iraq and Syria," said Zeid Ra'ad Al Hussein, the new U. N.  High Commissioner for Human Rights. "In particular, dedicated efforts are urgently needed to protect religious and ethnic groups, children – who are at risk of forcible recruitment and sexual violence – and women, who have been the targets of severe restrictions," Al Hussein said in his maiden speech to the Council. "The second step, as my predecessor  consistently stressed, must be to ensure accountability for gross violations of human rights and international crimes," he continued, arguing that "impunity can only lead to further conflicts and abuses, as revenge festers and the wrong lessons are learned. "Al Hussein, who comes from the Jordanian royal family, wants the Council to address the underlying factors of crises, particularly the "corrupt and discriminatory political systems that disenfranchised large parts of the population and leaders who oppressed or violently attacked independent actors of civil society".  Among others, he stressed the need to end "persistent discrimination and impunity" underlying the Israel-Palestine conflict – in which 2131 Palestinians were killed during the latest crisis in Gaza, including 1,473 civilians, 501 of them children, and 71 Israelis. The current session of the Human Rights Council is also scheduled to discuss issues such as basic economic and livelihood rights, which are going to be addressed through the UN's Sustainable Development Goals, the worsening plight of migrants around the world, and the detention of asylum seekers and migrants, including children in the United States. "Clearly, a number of human rights violations and the worsening plight of indigenous people are major issues that need to be tackled on a sustained basis," said Fujii.  "But it is important to raise the awareness of human rights education among media professionals and journalists who are invariably caught in the crossfire of conflicts. "During open discussion at the media professionals and journalists workshop, several reporters not only shared their personal experiences but also sought clarity on how reporters can safeguard human rights in conflicts where they are embedded with occupying forces in Iraq or other countries. "This is a major issue that needs to be addressed because it is difficult for journalists to respect human rights when they are embedded with forces," Oliver Rizzi Carlson, a representative of the United Network of Young Peacebuilders, told IPS. Commenting on the work that remains to be done in spreading global citizenship education, Fujii noted that tangible progress has been made by bringing several human rights pressure groups together in intensifying the campaign for human rights education. "Solidarity within civil society and increasing recognition for our work from member states is bringing about tangible results," said Fujii.  "The formation of an NGO coalition – HR 2020 – comprising 14 NGOs such as Amnesty International and SGI last year is a significant development in the intensification of our campaign. "(Edited by Phil Harris)