ERBIL, Iraqi Kurdistan, Nov 16 (IPS)  - There is daily news broadcasting at 9 in the evening and a live programme every Tuesday, Thursday and Saturday.  For the time being, that is what Mosul´s only TV channel has to offer from its headquarters in Erbil, the capital of Iraqi Kurdistan. Hani Subhi is the presenter of Mosul´s only TV, currently broadcasting from Erbil, in Iraqi Kurdistan (Karlos Zurutuza"We are still on the air only because we managed to bring a camera and satellite dish when we escaped from Mosul," Akram Taufiq, today the general manager of ‘Nineveh´s Future' – the name of the channel – tells IPSThe life of this 56 year-old journalist has been closely linked to television.  He spent eleven years with the Iraqi public channel during Saddam Hussein´s rule.  After the former Iraqi leader was toppled, he became the general manager of Mosul´s public channel Sama al Mosul – ‘Mosul´s heaven'.  He held his position until extremists of the Islamic State took over Iraq's second city early in June. 3Taufiq admits he had never thought "something like that" could ever happen.  "It took them just three days to tighten their grip over the whole city," recalls this Mosuli from his current office in a residential district in the outskirts of Erbil. Like all other Tuesdays, the staff, all of them volunteers, struggle to go on the air with their limited resources.  Taufiq invites us to watch the live programme on a flat TV screen hanging on the wall of his office. From an adjacent room, Hani Subhi, presenter, reviews the last news dealing with Mosul, which include the newly-established training camp.  According to Subhi, it will host the over 4,000 volunteers who have joined the ranks of the ‘Nineveh Police'.  The presenter adds that these troops were exclusively recruited among refugees from Mosul. "We cannot trust anyone coming from Mosul who says who wants to join as they could be spies for the IS," claims Taufiq, who says that the recently set up armed group is "a major step forward". "In the future, they will join the Mosul Brigades, groups inside the city that are conducting sabotage operations against members and interests of the Islamic State," Taufiq explains, without taking his eyes away from the TV screen. According to the journalist, the most awaited moment is the one dedicated to the live phone calls from inside the city.  Today there have been more than 1,700 requests.  Unfortunately there is no time for all them. The first one to go live is Abu Omar, a former policeman now in hiding because members of the previous security apparatus have become a priority target for the IS extremists. "I´m aching to see the Nineveh Police enter the city.  I´ll then be the first to join them and help them kill these bastards," says Omar from an undisclosed location in Mosul. Hassan follows from Tal Afar, a mainly Turkmen enclave west of Mosul, which hosts a significant Shiite community. "We Turkmens have become the main target of these vandals because we are not Arabs, and many of us aren´t even Sunni," says Hassan.  He hopes to remain alive "to see how the occupiers are sent away" from his village. There are also others who share first-hand information on the dire living conditions Mosulis are forced to face today. "We have to rely on power generators because we have only two hours of electricity every four days," Abu Younis explains over the phone. "The water supply is also erratic, coming only every two or three days, so we have to store it in our bathtubs and drums," he adds.  The worst part, however, is the seemingly total lack of security.  Atheel al Nujaifi, governor of Nineveh province until the IS outbreak, struggles to keep his government in Kurdish exile.  Credit: Karlos Zurutuza/IPS"People simply disappear mysteriously, and that´s when they are not executed in broad daylight," denounces Younis.  His city, he adds, has become "a massive open-air prison". A stolen revolutionIt is a stark testimony which is corroborated by Bashar Abdullah, a journalist from Mosul who is currently the news editor-in-chief of Nineveh´s Future.  Abdullah says he managed to take his wife and two children to Turkey late last month but that he has chosen to stay in Erbil "to keep working". The veteran journalist has not ruled out returning home soon but he admits he knows nothing about the state in which his house is today. "The jihadists have warned that anyone who leaves the city will lose their home.  They want to avoid a mass flight of the local population," explains Abdullah during a tea break. A report released this month by the Internal Displacement Monitoring Centre (IDMC) points that almost three million Iraqis are internally displaced.  Among those, over half a million have fled Mosul. Atheel al Nujaifi is likely the best known displaced person from Iraq´s second city.  He was the governor of Nineveh province until the IS outbreak.  Today he is also one of the main drivers of the TV channel. From his office in the same building, he admits to IPS that many Mosul residents welcomed the Islamic State fighters in open arms. "From the beginning I tried to convince everyone around that we had nothing to do with the IS.  A week after their arrival, everyone in Mosul realised that we had fallen into a trap," recalls this son of a prominent local tribe. In April 2013, Nujaifi received IPS at the Nineveh´s governorate building, in downtown Mosul.  Just a few metres away, mass demonstrations against the government were conducted, denouncing alleged marginalisation of the Sunni population of Iraq at the hands of the Shiite government in Baghdad. Nujaifi would regularly visit the square where the protests were held, openly showing support and giving incendiary speeches against Nuri al-Maliki, the then Prime Minister. Today from Erbil, he insists that one of the main goals of the TV channel is "to convey the people of Mosul that they still have a government", even if it´s in exile. "The Islamic State stole our revolution from us," laments Nujaifi late at night, just after the last member of the crew has left.  They will resume work tomorrow. (Edited by Phil Harris)