WASHINGTON, Dic 10 (IPS)  - Nearly two dozen health, advocacy and faith groups are calling on President Barack Obama to take executive action clarifying that U. S.  assistance can be used to fund abortion services for women and girls raped in the context of war and conflict. The groups gathered Tuesday outside of the White House to draw attention to what they say is an ongoing misreading by politicians as well as humanitarian groups of four-decade-old legislation.  That law, known as the Helms Amendment, specifies women's health services that can be supported by U. S.  overseas funding. 3This mis-interpretation, advocates warn, results in ongoing mental suffering, social disgrace and even additional abuse for women who have been raped. "For over 40 years, the Helms Amendment has been applied as a complete ban on abortion care in U. S. -funded global health programmes – with no exceptions," Purnima Mane, the president of Pathfinder International, a group that works on global sexual health issues, said in comments sent to IPS. "The result is that Pathfinder and other U. S.  government-funded agencies are unable to provide critical abortion care services to those at risk even under circumstances upheld by U. S.  law and clearly allowable under the Helms Amendment.  With the stroke of a pen, President Obama can change the outcome for many of these women and start to reverse more than four decades of neglect of their basic human rights and harm to their health. "Advocates say such an executive action would be in line with both the law and broader public opinion.  Indeed, on the face of it, the Helms Amendment seems to be quite clear. The amendment bans U. S.  funding from being used to "pay for the performance of abortion as a method of family planning" or to "motivate or coerce any person to practice abortions. " While the law does not specifically bar U. S.  assistance being used for abortion services in the case of rape, critics have long noted that this has been the impact since the start. "No U. S.  administration has ever implemented this correctly, in terms of making exemptions in certain instances," Serra Sippel, the president of the Center for Health and Gender Equity (CHANGE) and a key organiser of Tuesday's demonstration, told IPS. "This comes down to politics and the political environment in Washington.  But what we need is for the president to take leadership and direct USAID" – the federal government's main foreign assistance agency – "and the State Department to say the U. S.  government is taking a stand and supporting access to abortion in these cases. "Misinterpretation, self-censorshipAbortion has been, and remains, one of the most divisive issues in U. S.  politics.  By many metrics, this polarisation has only worsened with time. This came to the cultural and political forefront in 1973, when the U. S.  Supreme Court ruled in a landmark decision that a state law banning abortion (except to save the mother's life) was unconstitutional.  The ruling resulted in a lasting moral outrage among broad sections of the U. S.  public, though polls suggest that a majority of those in the United States support services following rape, incest or when a mother's life is at risk. The Helms Amendment was among the first legislative responses to the court's ruling, passed just months later.  Since then, the amendment has resulted in a discontinuation of U. S.  assistance for all abortion services in other countries. It is important to note that these procedures remain legal in the United States, as well as in many of the countries in which U. S. -funded entities, including government departments, are operating.  Humanitarian groups often feel they cannot even make abortion-related information available to women, including those raped during conflict – even if the Helms Amendment doesn't specifically proscribe doing so. "These restrictions, collectively, have resulted in a perception that U. S.  foreign policy on abortion is more onerous than the actual law …  a pervasive atmosphere of confusion, misunderstanding and inhibition around other abortion-related activities beyond direct services," analysis published last year by the Guttmacher Institute, a sexual health-focused think tank here, reports. "Wittingly or unwittingly, both NGOs and U. S.  officials have been transgressors and victims alike in the misinterpretation and misapplication of U. S.  anti-abortion law … whether through misinterpretation or self-censorship, NGOs are needlessly refraining from providing abortion counseling or referrals. "Global statistics on conflict-time rapes and resulting pregnancies are hard to come by.  Human Rights Watch points to 2004 research carried out in Liberia, where rape was used as a weapon of war, suggesting that around 15 percent of wartime rapes led to pregnancy. "Human rights practitioners and public health officials from Bosnia, the Democratic Republic of Congo, Colombia, and other countries at war, have collected evidence from conflict rape survivors showing both that pregnancy happens and that it has devastating consequences for women and girls," Liesl Gerntholtz, the executive director of a Human Rights Watch's women's rights division, wrote Tuesday. "They are left to continue unwanted pregnancies and bear children they often cannot care for and who are daily reminders of the brutal attacks they suffered.  This, in turn, makes these children more vulnerable to stigmatization, abuse, and abandonment. "Global acknowledgmentOn Tuesday, the groups participating in the White House demonstration also called on President Obama to clarify that the Helms Amendment does not apply to pregnancies resulting from incest or if the mother's life is at risk.  Yet the focus of the calls remains on rape in the context of war and conflict. Advocates say public consciousness on this issue has risen significantly over the past year and a half.  To a great extent, this has been driven by the conflict in Syria and the rise of the Islamic State, as well as the ongoing violence in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC), and the centrality of sexual violence in each of these. "We know that rape has been used as a weapon of war throughout history.  What's new is the attention from governments and advocates over the past 18 months," CHANGE's Sippel says. "The prevention of violence cannot stand alone.  We want to prevent these acts but also, when that violence does occur, to make sure that organisations and government agencies are providing the necessary post-rape care, including legal and social services, as well as mental and physical health services.  Abortion services need to be part of that package. "The United States has been a strong global advocate against sexual violence in recent years, including with regard to conflict situations.  President Obama has created the first U. S.  action plan on women's role in peace-building, a White House strategy on gender-based violence, among other actions. Advocates say that clarifying the Helms Amendment would be the next logical step.  Although the White House was unable to comment for this story, organisers of Tuesday's rally say President Obama's aides did meet with advocates working on sexual violence in Colombia, the DRC and elsewhere. Edited by Kitty StappThe writer can be reached at cbiron@ips. org