UNITED NATIONS, Apr 09 (IPS)  - "Political negotiations, not military intervention are the solution" said United Nations Secretary-General, Ban Ki-moon, on the rapidly deteriorating conflict situation in Yemen and recent developments in Syria at the Yarmouk refugee camp. Speaking from the U. N.  Headquarters in New York, Ban spoke of the countless civilians that are being abandoned to misery in recent days as violence has escalated. "Yemeni families are struggling for the very basics - water, food, fuel and medicines.  Hundreds have been killed.  Hospitals and schools are shutting down - some of which are direct targets of the fighting," said Ban. Before the current crisis, Yemen's overall humanitarian needs were on a similar scale to all other nine countries of the Sahel region combined, but now the country has almost doubled the number of people classified as 'severely food insecure', he added. The territorial advance by the Houthis and their allies, undermining the legitimate government, is a clear violation of the Security Council resolutions and a violation of the international humanitarian law, Ban said. The crisis in Yemen has worsened since the Arab coalition military operation led by the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia at the request of president Hadi. Ban said, "The U. N. - brokered negotiations, endorsed by the Security Council, remain the best chance to help get the transition back on track and preserve the country's unity and territorial integrity. "On Syria, the Secretary-General addressed the situation in the Yarmouk refugee camp, in Damascus, where residents, including over 3,500 children, are being held hostage by Da'esh armed elements. According to the U. N.  Relief and Works Agency (UNRWA), around 18,000 Palestinian and Syrian refugees are being held in the camp. "Civilians must be spared.  Civilians must be protected at all times," remarked Ban, saying that he is urging world leaders, member states, governments and parties involved to end all forms of violence. Also on Thursday, U. N.  Special Advisers on both genocide and the Responsibility to Protect expressed concern about the situation in Yarmouk. "The Special Advisers recalled the commitment by all Heads of State and government in 2005 to protect populations from genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity and to cooperate in fulfilling their collective responsibility to protect. "Follow Valentina Ieri on Twitter @ValeieriEdited by Roger Hamilton-Martin