BERLIN/TOKYO, Aug 10 (IPS)  - Seventy years after the brutal and militarily unwarranted atomic bombings of the Japanese cities of Hiroshima and Nagasaki on Aug.  6 and 9, a nuclear weapons free world is far from within reach. nagasaki peace declarationCommemorating the two events, the mayors of Hiroshima and Nagasaki made impassioned pleas for heeding the experiences of the survivors of the atomic bombings and the growing worldwide awareness of the compelling need for complete abolition of such weapons. The atomic bombings in 1945 destroyed the two cities, and more than 200,000 people died of nuclear radiation, shockwaves from the blasts and thermal radiation.  Over 400,000 have died since the end of the war, from the after-effects of the bombs. As of Mar.  31, 2015, the Japanese government had recognised 183,519 as ‘hibakusha' (explosion-affected people), most of them living in Japan.  Japan's Atomic Bomb Survivors Relief Law defines hibakusha as people who were: within a few kilometres of the hypocentres of the bombs; within 2 km of the hypocentres within two weeks of the bombings; exposed to radiation from fallout; or not yet born but carried by pregnant women in any of these categories. 3During the commemorative events in Hiroshima and Nagasaki, reports in several newspapers confirmed that those bombings were militarily unwarranted. Gar Alperovitz, formerly Lionel R.  Bauman Professor of Political Economy at the University of Maryland, wrote in The Nation that that "the war was won before Hiroshima – and the generals who dropped the bomb knew it. "He quoted Adm.  William Leahy, President Harry S.  Truman's Chief of Staff, who wrote in his 1950 memoir ‘I Was There'  "the use of this barbarous weapon at Hiroshima and Nagasaki was of no material assistance in our war against Japan.  The Japanese were already defeated and ready to surrender …"Gen.  Dwight Eisenhower, the U. S.  president from 1953 until 1961, shared this view.  He was a five-star general in the United States Army during World War II and served as Supreme Commander of the Allied Forces in Europe. Eisenhower stated in his memoirs that when notified by Secretary of War Henry Stimson of the decision to use atomic weapons, he "voiced to him my grave misgivings, first on the basis of my belief that Japan was already defeated and that dropping the bomb was completely unnecessary. "Even the famous "hawk" Maj.  Gen.  Curtis LeMay, head of the Twenty-First Bomber Command, went public the month after the bombing, telling the press that "the atomic bomb had nothing to do with the end of the war at all," wrote Alperovitz. "The peoples of this world must unite or they will perish," warned Robert Oppenheimer, widely considered the father of the bomb, as he called on politicians to place the terrifying power of the atom under strict international control. Oppenheimer's call has yet to be followed. In his fervent address on Aug.  6, Kazumi Matsui, mayor of the City of Hiroshima, said: "Our world still bristles with more than 15,000 nuclear weapons, and policy-makers in the nuclear-armed states remain trapped in provincial thinking, repeating by word and deed their nuclear intimidation. "He added: "We now know about the many incidents and accidents that have taken us to the brink of nuclear war or nuclear explosions.  Today, we worry as well about nuclear terrorism. "As long as nuclear weapons exist, he warned, anyone could become a hibakusha at any time.  If that happens, the damage would reach indiscriminately beyond national borders.  "People of the world, please listen carefully to the words of the hibakusha and, profoundly accepting the spirit of Hiroshima, contemplate the nuclear problem as your own," he exhorted. As president of Mayors for Peace, comprising mayors from more than 6,700 member cities, Kazumi Matsui vowed: "Hiroshima will act with determination, doing everything in our power to accelerate the international trend toward negotiations for a nuclear weapons convention and abolition of nuclear weapons by 2020. "This, he said, was the first step toward nuclear weapons abolition.  The next step would be to create, through the trust thus won, broadly versatile security systems that do not depend on military might. "Working with patience and perseverance to achieve those systems will be vital, and will require that we promote throughout the world the path to true peace revealed by the pacifism of the Japanese Constitution," he added. "We call on the Japanese government, in its role as bridge between the nuclear- and non-nuclear-weapon states, to guide all states toward these discussions, and we offer Hiroshima as the venue for dialogue and outreach," the mayor of Hiroshima said. In the Nagasaki Peace Declaration issued on Aug.  9, Nagasaki mayor Tomihisa Taue asked the Japanese government and Parliament to "fix your sights on the future, and please consider a conversion from a ‘nuclear umbrella' to a ‘non-nuclear umbrella'. "Japan does not possess any atomic weapons and is protected, like South Korea and Germany, as well as most of the NATO member states, by the U. S.  nuclear umbrella. He appealed to the Japanese government to explore national security measures, which do not rely on nuclear deterrence.  "The establishment of a ‘Northeast Asia Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone (NEA-NWFZ),' as advocated by researchers in America, Japan, Korea, China, and many other countries, would make this possible," he said. Referring to the Japanese Parliament "currently deliberating a bill, which will determine how our country guarantees its security", he said: "There is widespread unease and concern that the oath which was engraved onto our hearts 70 years ago and the peaceful ideology of the Constitution of Japan are now wavering.  I urge the Government and the Diet to listen to these voices of unease and concern, concentrate their wisdom, and conduct careful and sincere deliberations. "The Nagasaki Peace Declaration noted that the peaceful ideology of the Constitution of Japan was born from painful and harsh experiences, and from reflection on the war.  "Since the war, our country has walked the path of a peaceful nation.  For the sake of Nagasaki, and for the sake of all of Japan, we must never change the peaceful principle that we renounce war," the declaration said. The Nagasaki mayor regretted that the Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) held at the United Nations earlier this year had struggled with reaching agreement on a Final Document. However, said Taue, the efforts of those countries which were attempting to ban nuclear weapons had made possible a draft Final Document "which incorporated steps towards nuclear disarmament. "He urged the heads of NPT member states not to allow the NPT Review Conference "to have been a waste".  Instead, they should continue their efforts to debate a legal framework, such as a ‘Nuclear Weapons Convention (NWC),' at every opportunity, including at the General Assembly of the United Nations. Many countries at the Review Conference were in agreement that it was important to visit the atomic-bombed cities of Nagasaki and Hiroshima. Against this backdrop, the Nagasaki mayor appealed to "President  Obama, heads of state, including the heads of the nuclear weapon states, and all the people of the world … (to) please come to Nagasaki and Hiroshima, and see for yourself exactly what happened under those mushroom clouds 70 years ago. "No U. S.  president has ever attended the any event to commemorate the atomic bombing of Hiroshima.  Undersecretary of State for Arms Control and International Security Rose Gottemoeller was the highest-ranking U. S.  official at the Aug.  6 ceremony.  She was reported as saying that nuclear weapons should never be used again. Edited by Phil Harris    