HIROSHIMA, Aug 28 (IPS)  - A three-day landmark U. N.  Conference on Disarmament Issues has ended here – one day ahead of the International Day Against Nuclear Tests – stressing the need for ushering in a world free of nuclear weapons, but without a consensus on how to move towards that goal. The Aug.  26-28 conference, organised by the Bangkok-based United Nations Regional Centre for Peace and Disarmament in Asia and the Pacific (UNRCPD) in cooperation with the Ministry of Foreign Affairs (MOFA) of Japan and the city and Prefecture of Hiroshima, was attended by more than 80 government officials and experts, also from beyond the region. It was the twenty-fifth annual meeting of its kind held in Japan, which acquired a particular importance against the backdrop of the 70th anniversary of the atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki, and the founding of the United Nations. 3Summing up the deliberations, UNRCPD Director Yuriy Kryvonos said the discussions on "the opportunities and challenges in nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation" had been "candid and dynamic". The Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) Review Conference from Apr.  27 to May 22 at the U. N.  headquarters drew the focus in presentations and panel discussions. Ambassador Taous Feroukhi of Algeria, who presided over the NPT Review Conference, explained at length why the gathering had failed to agree on a universally acceptable draft final text, despite a far-reaching consensus on a wide range of crucial issues: refusal of the United States, Britain and Canada to accept the proposal for convening a conference by Mar.  1, 2016, for a Middle East Zone Free of Weapons of Mass Destruction (WMDs). Addressing the issue, Japan's Foreign Minister Fumio Kishida joined several government officials and experts in expressing his regrets that the draft final document was not adopted due to the issue of WMDs. Kishida noted that the failure to establish a new Action Plan at the Review Conference had led to a debate over the viability of the NPT.  "However," he added, "I would like to make one thing crystal clear.  The NPT regime has played an extremely important role for peace and stability in the international community; a role that remains unchanged even today. "The Hiroshima conference not only discussed divergent views on measures to preserve the effective implementation of the NPT, but also the role of the yet-to-be finalised Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty (CTBT) in achieving the goal of elimination of nuclear weapons, humanitarian consequences of the use of atomic weapons, and the significance of nuclear weapon free zones (NWFZs) for strengthening the non-proliferation regime and nuclear disarmament. Speakers attached particular attention to the increasing role of local municipalities, civil society and nuclear disarmament education, including testimonies from ‘hibakusha' (survivors of atomic bombings mostly in their 80s and above) in consolidating common understanding of the threat posed by nuclear weapons for people from all countries around the world regardless whether or not their governments possess nuclear weapons. UNRCPD Director Kryvonos said the Hiroshima conference had given "a good start for searching new fresh ideas on how we should move towards our goal – protecting our planet from a risk of using nuclear weapons. "Hiroshima Prefecture Governor Hidehiko Yuzaki, the city's Mayor Karzumi Matsui – son of a ‘hibakusha' father and president of the Mayors for Peace organisation comprising 6,779 cities in 161 countries and regions – as well as his counterpart from Nagasaki, Tomihisa Taue, pleaded for strengthening a concerted campaign for a nuclear free world.  Taue is also the president of the National Council of Japan's Nuclear-Free Local Authorities. Hiroshima and Nagasaki city leaders welcomed suggestions for a nuclear disarmament summit next year in Hiroshima, which they said would lend added thrust to awareness raising for a world free of nuclear weapons. Though foreign ministry officials refused to identify themselves publicly with the proposal, Japan's Foreign Minister Fumio Kishida, who hails from Hiroshima, emphasised the need for nuclear-weapon and non-nuclear weapon states to "work together in steadily advancing practical and concrete measures in order to make real progress in nuclear disarmament. "Kishida said that Japan will submit a "new draft resolution on the total elimination of nuclear weapons" to the forthcoming meeting of the U. N.  General Assembly.  Such a resolution, he said, was "appropriate to the 70th year since the atomic bombings and could serve as guidelines for the international community for the next five years, on the basis of the Review Conference". The next NPT Review Conference is expected to be held in 2020. Mayors for Peace has launched a 2020 Vision Campaign as the main vehicle for advancing their agenda – a nuclear-weapon-free world by the year 2020. The campaign was initiated on a provisional basis by the Executive Cities of Mayors for Peace at their meeting in Manchester, Britain, in October 2003.  It was launched under the name 'Emergency Campaign to Ban Nuclear Weapons' in November of that year at the 2nd Citizens Assembly for the Elimination of Nuclear Weapons held in Nagasaki, Japan. In August 2005, the World Conference endorsed continuation of the campaign under the title of the '2020 Vision Campaign'. Foreign Minister Kishida expressed the views of the inhabitants of the cities of Hiroshima and Nagasaki when he pointed out in a message to the UNRCPD conference: "… the reality of atomic bombings is far from being sufficiently understood worldwide. "He added: "In order to achieve a world free of nuclear weapons, it is extremely important for political leaders, young people and others worldwide to visit Hiroshima and Nagasaki and see for themselves the reality of atomic bombings.  Through this, I am convinced that we will be able to share our aspirations for a world free of nuclear weapons. "Edited by Phil Harris    