UNITED NATIONS, Sep 07 (IPS)  - Another reality that emerges very distinctly in culture of peace is that we should never forget when women – half of world's seven billion plus people - are marginalised and their equality is not established in all spheres of human activity, there is no chance for our world to get sustainable peace in the real sense.  Photo Courtesy of Ambassador ChowdhuryI would reiterate that women in particular have a major role to play in promoting the culture of peace in our violence-ridden societies, thereby bringing in lasting peace and reconciliation.  While women are often the first victims of armed conflict, they must also and always be recognised as key to the resolution of the conflict. I believe with all my conviction that without peace, development is not possible, without development, peace is not achievable, but without women, neither peace nor development can be realised. Integral connection between development and peaceIn today's world we continue to perceive an inherent paradox that needs our attention.  The process of globalisation has created an irreversible trend toward a global integrated community, while at the same time, divisions and distrust keep on manifesting in different and complex ways. Disparities and inequalities within and among nations have been causing insecurity and uncertainty that has become an unwanted reality in our lives.  That is why I strongly believe that peace and development are two sides of the same coin.  One is meaningless without the other; one cannot be achieved without the other. 3Education as the most critical element in the culture of peaceA key ingredient in building the culture of peace is education.  Peace education needs to be accepted in all parts of the world, in all societies and countries as an essential element in creating the culture of peace. The young of today deserves a radically different education –"one that does not glorify war but educates for peace, non-violence and international cooperation. " They need the skills and knowledge to create and nurture peace for their individual selves as well as for the world they belong to. As Maria Montessori had articulated so appropriately, "Those who want a violent way of living, prepare young people for that; but those who want peace have neglected their young children and adolescents and that way are unable to organize them for peace. "It is being increasingly realised that over-emphasis on cognitive learning in schools at the cost of developing children's emotional, social, moral and humanistic aspects has been a costly mistake. Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon asserted at the very first High Level Forum on the Culture of Peace in 2012 that ". . . .  We are here to talk about how to create this culture of peace.  I have a simple, one-word answer: education.  Through education, we teach children not to hate.  Through education, we raise leaders who act with wisdom and compassion.  Through education, we establish a true, lasting culture of peace. "In this context, I commend the initiative of the Soka University of America located near Los Angeles in initiating in 2014 its annual "Dialogue on The Culture of Peace and Non-Violence" as an independent, unbiased, non-partisan, intellectual forum to outline avenues and direction for incorporating the culture of peace and non-violence into all spheres of the educational experience. Never has it been more important for us to learn about the world and understand its diversity.  The task of educating children and young people to find non-aggressive means to relate with one another is of primary importance. As I had underscored at the conference hosted by the Hague Appeal for Peace on "Educating toward a World without Violence" in Albania in 2004, "the participation of young people in this process is very essential.  Their inputs in terms of their own ideas on how to cooperate with each other in order to eliminate violence in our societies must be fully taken into account. "Peace education is more effective and meaningful when it is adopted according to the social and cultural context and the country's needs and aspirations.  It should be enriched by its cultural and spiritual values together with the universal human values. It should also be globally relevant.  The Hague Agenda for Peace and Justice rightly emphasises that "…culture of peace will be achieved when citizens of the world understand global problems; have the skills to resolve conflicts constructively; know and live by international standards of human rights, gender and racial equality; appreciate cultural diversity; and respect the integrity of the Earth. "Indeed, this should be more appropriately called "education for global citizenship".  Such learning cannot be achieved without well-intentioned, sustained, and systematic peace education that leads the way to the culture of peace. The U. N.  Secretary-General's Global Education First Initiative's essential objective is to promote global citizenship as the main objective of education.  Connecting the role of individuals to broader global objectives, Dr.  Martin Luther King Junior affirmed that "An individual has not started living until he can rise above the narrow confines of his individualistic concerns to the broader concerns of all humanity. "Let me conclude by asserting that to turn the culture of peace into a global, universal movement, basically all that is needed is for every one of us to be a true believer in peace and non-violence, and to practice what we profess. Whether it is at events like the annual High Level Forums, in places of worship, in schools or in our homes, a lot can be achieved in promoting the culture of peace through individual resolve and action.  Peace and non-violence should become a part of our daily existence.  This is the only way we shall achieve a just and sustainable peace in the world. Part One can be read here. Edited by Kitty Stapp