UNITED NATIONS, Oct 01 (IPS)  - The Saudi coalition, which continues its air strikes against rebels in strife-torn Yemen, is fast gaining notoriety as "the gang that couldn't shoot straight" – largely because of its misses than its hits. Last month, the coalition is reported to have targeted a bomb-making factory – and ended up killing some 36 civilians working at a water-bottling plant in northern Yemen. And this week, the Saudi coalition unleashed an air attack on a wedding party in Yemen triggering outrage from Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon. A statement released here said the Secretary-General condemned the air strikes that reportedly struck a wedding party in Wahijah village, outside of the Red Sea port city of Mokha in Yemen, killing as many as 135 people.   "The Secretary-General expresses his deepest condolences and sympathies to the families of the victims and a swift recovery to those injured," he said. Ted Lieu, Democratic Congressman from California, has urged the United States to "cease aiding coalition air strikes in Yemen until the coalition demonstrates they will institute proper safeguards to prevent civilian deaths. "In an interview with the New York Times, Lieu said it was unclear whether the coalition "was grossly negligent or intentionally targeting civilians. ""There is clearly no military value in a wedding party," he said. The Saudi-led coalition of Arab states, includes Egypt, Jordan, Morocco, Sudan, the United Arab Emirates, Kuwait, Qatar and Bahrain. Relenting to Saudi objections Wednesday, the Western group of countries, have withdrawn a proposal for an international inquiry into civilian casualties in Yemen – by both the Saudi coalition and the Houthi rebels – during the current session of the Human Rights Council in Geneva. The proposal for such an inquiry was being strongly supported by the U. N.  High Commissioner for Human Rights Prince Zeid Ra'ad al-Hussein who submitted a report to the HRC last month detailing the heavy civilian casualties in the conflict in Yemen. A new resolution may opt for a national commission of inquiry, instead of an international commission. After the airstrike in the bottling factory, Brig.  Gen.  Ahmed al-Assiri, the military spokesman for the coalition, reportedly told Reuters the plant had been used by the Houthi rebels to make explosive devices and was not, in fact, a bottling factory. But all of the individuals interviewed by Human Rights Watch (HRW) said the plant was being used to bottle water and was not being used for any military purposes. In its statement, HRW also said a group of international journalists travelled to the site of the blast two days after it was hit and could not find evidence of any military targets in the area.  "They carefully examined the site and could not find any evidence that the factory was being used for military purposes, and took photo and video evidence of piles of scorched plastic bottles melted together from the heat of the explosion," HRW said. U. N.  spokesperson Stephane Dujarric told reporters Wednesday: "Our humanitarian colleagues (in Yemen) inform us that the number of deaths and injuries caused by explosive weapons in Yemen is the world's highest. "He said some 4,500 civilians were killed or wounded by explosive weapons in Yemen during the first seven months of 2015.  This is more than in any other country, according to a recently-released report done by the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) and the NGO Action on Armed Violence. Ninety-five per cent of people killed or injured by explosive weapons in populated areas were civilians.  More than half of the reported civilian toll was recorded in Sana'a and surrounding districts.  The United Nations, meanwhile, has repeatedly called on all parties to the conflict to uphold their responsibility to protect civilians. Asked if the attacks were deliberate or due to shoddy human and military intelligence, Donatella Rovera, Senior Crisis Response Adviser at the London-based Amnesty International (AI) told IPS these recent attacks are unfortunately not isolated incidents but very much part of an increasingly entrenched pattern in the conduct of Saudi Arabia-led coalition forces over the past six months.  She said AI had addressed this issue its last report and in the document titled ‘Nowhere safe for civilians' Rovera said coalition strikes, which killed and injured civilians and destroyed civilian property and infrastructure – and investigated by Amnesty International – have been found to be "frequently disproportionate or indiscriminate. " In some instances, Amnesty International found that strikes appeared to have apparently directly targeted civilians or civilian objects.  She pointed out that international humanitarian law prohibits deliberate attacks on civilians and civilian objects, and attacks which do not discriminate between civilians/civilian objects and combatants/military objectives, or which cause disproportionate harm to civilians/civilian objects in relation to the anticipated military advantage which may be gained by such attack.  "Such attacks constitute war crimes," she noted.  The pattern of attacks, which since the beginning of the coalition air bombardment campaign on March 25, 2015 have continued to cause civilian casualties, and the lack of investigations to date into such incidents raise serious concerns about an apparent disregard for civilian life and for fundamental principles of international humanitarian law, not only by those planning and executing the strikes but also by the exiled Yemeni government, at whose behest Saudi Arabia-led coalition forces are acting, Rovera declared.  The Washington-based Center for Civilians in Conflict (CIVIC) said the United States, which is providing intelligence and logistical support to the Saudi-led campaign in Yemen, should condition its support on adherence to international humanitarian law (IHL) and adoption of policies to minimize civilian harm by its allies. Federico Borello, executive director of CIVIC, said: "The US has developed policies and tactics for preventing civilian harm from its own combat operations.  These should be shared as a key element of any ongoing support to the coalition. "The writer can be contacted at thalifdeen@aol. com