TURKEY, Feb 04 (IPS)  - The latest footage to come out of Sur, the historical district in Diyarbakir that has been under total lock down by Turkish armed forces for the past sixty days, shows a level of devastation one would sooner expect in Syria.  In more ways than one – empty streets lined with debris, bombed-out buildings, tanks and soldiers shooting at invisible assailants – the situation in Turkey's predominantly Kurdish southeastern regions resembles a war zone. The Turkish government maintains that it is engaged in a fight against terror.  However, the security operations are characterized by a disproportionate use of violence, whereby entire towns and neighborhoods are cut off from the outside world with civilians trapped inside their homes for weeks on end.  This has led to calls by international human rights organizations to end the collective punishment of an entire population for the acts of a small minority.  At its second general congress in late January, the key political representative of the Kurdish population in Turkey, the Peoples' Democratic Party, or HDP, stressed its determination to seek a peaceful solution to the violent conflict.  "If politics can play a role, weapons are not necessary.  Where there's no politics, there will be 
weapons," Selahattin Demirtaş, the co-chair of the party summarized the situation.  From autonomy to conflictIn the spring of 2013 hopes were high for a political solution to the decades-old violent conflict between the Turkish state and its Kurdish minority, represented on the battlefield by the leftist Kurdistan Workers' Party, or PKK.  After years of fighting and tens of thousands deaths, both parties appeared determined to bring the war to an end and engage in peace talks.  For almost 2. 5 years the fighting ceased.  The precarious peace came to an end in the summer of 2015.  As a spillover from the war in Syria, tensions between the Kurds in Turkey and the ruling Justice and Development Party, or AKP, reached a boiling point.  In Syria, local Kurds had been fighting off a number of Turkey-backed jihadist and Syrian opposition groups – most prominently the so-called Islamic State, or ISIS.  When Kurdish groups in Turkey became the target of two ISIS-linked suicide attacks – in Diyarbakir in June, and Suruç in July – it was the AKP that was held responsible for the onslaught.  The ceasefire broke down and violence escalated quickly.  Turkey launched air raids against PKK targets in northern Iraq, in response to which security forces inside Turkey were attacked by Kurdish militants.  Having lost their trust in the Turkish state to properly address Kurdish grievances concerning the right to speak and be educated in their mother tongue, to practice their own religion, to be represented politically and to protect the natural environment of their historical homelands, many Kurds instead turned to the ideology of "democratic confederalism".  Developed by the jailed leader of the PKK, Abdullah Öcalan, democratic confederalism promotes the autonomy of local communities and a decentralization of the state.  When towns and neighborhoods across the Kurdish regions of Turkey started declaring their autonomy in the wake of the re-escalated conflict, the Turkish state under the leadership of President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan responded by sending in the army and declaring dozens of so-called curfews that in practice amount to military sieges.  Besides hundreds of casualties among the army and Kurdish militants, around two hundred civilians are believed to have been killed in the past six months.  Bleak prospects for peace After the HDP became the first party with roots in the Kurdish freedom movement to pass the exceedingly high electoral threshold of 10 per cent at the parliamentary elections in June – and again at the snap elections in November – it has come under severe pressure from the political establishment.  President Erdogan personally suggested that the HDP representatives ought to be stripped from their immunity so that they could be prosecuted for supporting terrorism.  Nonetheless, the party refuses to succumb to the intimidation and has consistently called for a peaceful and democratic solution to the conflict.  "Despite all the oppression, a new democratic model is emerging," HDP co-chair Figen Yüksedağ said in her speech at the congress.  "This model continues to gain support, even while under attack.  The HDP has a historical responsibility to bring this project to a successful end. " Her co-chair Demirtaş added the warning that "If we fail to produce a solution for the end of the violence, it is the end of politics in Turkey. " Unfortunately, prospects for a political solution are bleak.  Mayors and political representatives of the towns and districts where the population has called for autonomy are prosecuted and jailed.  At the same time President Erdogan warned that, "It should be known that we will bring the whole world down on those who seek to establish a state within a state under the name of autonomy and self-governance. "Prime Minister Davutoğlu recently vowed to continue the military operations until "our mountains, plains and towns are cleansed of these killers. " This type of uncompromising discourse from the country's two most powerful political leaders instills little hope that the government is prepared to return to the negotiation table any time soon.  The Kurds, both at home and across the border in Syria, are seen as the biggest threat to the territorial integrity of Turkey, and to stop this perceived threat no price is too high.  In the same way that Turkey has refused to allow the Syrian Kurds a seat at the negotiation table in Geneva, it is refusing to enter into dialogue with the Kurds at home.  The multiple references to Syria in this article are no coincidence; if the Turkish government continues to ignore all but a military solution to the current unrest, there is a very real threat that part of the country will soon resemble its southern neighbor.  The HDP's invitation is there.  In the words of co-chair Demirtaş: "Dialogue and negotiation should be the method when the public is under threat.  Strengthening democracy is the only way to save Turkey from disaster. " (End)