A recent meeting between Iraq’s Prime Minister Nouri al-Maliki and Kurdish  President Massoud Barzani appears to be a crucial step in lowering tensions in  the country, but it has also prompted questions as to whether the two leaders  can put an end to their differences. The meeting came as the fever of presidential and parliamentary elections in  Kurdistan subsided and at a time that the U. S.  is actively pressuring both  sides to return to the negotiation table. It was the first time in a year that the two leaders held direct talks in the  northern resort town of Dukan - with the apparent mediation of Iraq’s  President Jalal Talabani, a Kurd. While the two leaders exchanged positive words in a largely conciliatory  gesture and decided to continue high-level contacts, sceptics were hoping  these would be genuine moves toward an eventual resolution of a range of  disputes between the two sides. 'I hope this visit by PM Maliki to Kurdistan region will not be only an election  propaganda and that the visit will lead to a resolution of differences between  [Kurdistan] regional government and the central government,' Dhafer al-Ani,  the head of Tawafuq bloc - the largest Sunni Arab group in Iraqi Parliament -  said in a statement. In fact, with Iraq’s parliamentary elections scheduled for January, some may  see this as an attempt by Maliki to regain Kurds’ favour in order to retain his  office after elections. While the recent meeting marks a rapprochement between the two sides,  there is no indication that it would necessarily lead to a resolution of  differences.  Both leaders will risk their popularity and possibly political  careers if they would want to make significant compromises - without which  a deal does not seem achievable. A few recent developments appear to have prompted the meeting between  Kurdish leaders and Maliki. During his visit to Washington last month, U. S.  President Barack Obama urged  Maliki to show more flexibility toward other Iraqi groups in order to achieve  national reconciliation.  Three administration heavy weights - including Vice  President Joe Biden, Defence Secretary Robert Gates and Chairman of the Joint  Chiefs of Staff Admiral Michael Mullen - travelled to Iraq in July to drive the  point home to Maliki and Kurdish leaders that Washington was keen to see  both sides resume dialogue. But all had to wait until Kurdish parliamentary and presidential elections  ended. Nationalistic rhetoric had surged during the campaign, especially as Barzani  and Talabani’s joint ruling coalition was trying to gain more votes by  highlighting 'threats' facing Kurds from others.  On more than one occasion,  Barzani said he would make no compromise with Baghdad over Kurdish  demands. With a strong opposition born out of those elections, the question for many  was whether Kurdish policy vis-à-vis Baghdad would undergo any significant  changes.  During recent Kurdish elections the joint ruling coalition of Barzani  and Talabani won only around 58 percent of votes, according to initial results  announced by the electoral commission of Iraq.  The two other major  opposition groups have won around 37 percent of the vote in what was a  shock to the political establishment in Iraqi Kurdistan. However, Barzani himself was re-elected as Kurdish president, drawing  nearly 70 percent of votes.  But, opposition members have accused Barzani of  not handling Kurd-Baghdad politics very well. Barzani’s meeting with Maliki before final election results are announced  indicates a willingness on the part of the Kurdish leader to keep the initiative  in dealing with Baghdad in his hands - while not involving the future diverse  parliament that much. With the withdrawal of U. S.  troops from Iraq scheduled by the end of 2011,  many think Kurds do not have the advantage of time on their side.  That  comes as the national government is becoming more powerful day-by-day,  at times at the expense of the Kurdistan Regional Government (KRG). 'KRG has to come to some sort of an agreement with Baghdad soon, because  it is not strong enough to combat Baghdad in the long run,' Michael Gunter, a  professor of Political Science at Tennessee Tech University, told IPS. 'Who is going to look after Kurdish national interests in the long-run, and  after the U. S.  leaves the country,' said Gunter who has written on the Kurdish  situation for years. Kurds have been the closest U. S.  allies within the country since the invasion  of Iraq in 2003, and the U. S.  military has at several times intervened to  prevent the breakout of violence between Kurdish and Iraqi army forces.  The  latest instance was when Iraqi army troops were heading to a Kurdish town  called Makhmur, east of Mosul.  As there was a serious chance of clashes, the  U. S.  military managed to defuse the tensions and convince the Iraqi units not  to enter the town. As tensions between the rural Kurds on one side, and the central government  and Iraqi Arabs on the other side have increased in recent months, some in  Washington and Baghdad have accused Kurds of adopting a maximalist and  uncompromising approach.  But many inside Kurdistan fiercely oppose any  such notion. Shaqfiq Qazzaz - a veteran of Kurdish politics - rejects any branding of  Kurdish positions as 'extravagant and extreme. ''Whenever Iraq is in trouble, it is Kurds who are asked to accommodate and  compromise.  They set redlines, but forget that Kurds have redlines of their  own as well,' Qazzaz, who was a minister in KRG until a few years ago, told  IPS in a phone interview from Irbil, Iraq.  'There is a certain extent to which  Kurdish leaders can make compromise, otherwise they will be on the losing  side and their people will not accept that. 'KRG’s differences with the Baghdad government include the borders of  Kurdistan, oil and gas exploration rights, the power of the KRG versus  Baghdad, and the status of the Kurdish forces known as Peshmarga.  At the  heart of the disputes is the chronic issue of Kirkuk that has complicated  Kurdish relations with almost all governments in Iraq since the country was  established in 1920s. 