A government offensive against rebels in the eastern Democratic Republic of Congo that began in January has dramatically increased sexual violence in the provinces of North and South Kivu. A survey of 569 civilians living in 20 conflict-ridden communities conducted by Oxfam found people live in constant fear of both government troops and rebels. Civilians have endured rape, torture and forced labour since Congo's army launched a joint operation with Rwanda's armed forces in late January against the Democratic Forces for the Liberation of Rwanda, who have operated out of the region since the aftermath of Rwanda's 1994 genocide. IPS: How would you describe the current humanitarian situation in the eastern DRC?Aimee Ansari: The military operations have had devastating impact on the lives of the people.  The majority of people (surveyed by Oxfam) said they feel less safe now than they did a year ago. There is systematic violence against women, including widespread rape.  Looting is commonplace.  Children are forced to work for militias.  In some of the communities that Oxfam surveyed, there were reports of torture. In some communities, both government forces and FDLR have committed horrendous acts of sexual violence against both men and women, with reports of children as young as four years having been raped. IPS: What needs to happen to implement an adequate humanitarian response?AA: Firstly, the protection of civilians must be respected.  The Congolese government must ensure that they incorporate the risks to civilians into their planning. When there is a conflict, all armed actors are required to respect and protect civilians, and not to use them as tools of the conflict.  The regional governments and their partners need to work together to address the structural causes of conflict. There are options, other than military ones, that should be considered.  Regional governments and their international partners should resource, deploy and expand existing non-military tools, such as encouraging voluntary disarmament.  And they should facilitate return or resettlement of those who disarm.  IPS: What should be the international response to the crisis in the DRC?AA: The United Nations Security Council should set out and stand by clear conditions for continued support for the joint operations with the Congolese army, including ensuring that human rights abusers do not take part in military actions and guaranteeing rigorous monitoring and application of appropriate sanctions for any violations of international humanitarian law. The U. N.  and other international partners should pressure regional governments and the U. N.  Security Council to review the current strategy, which focuses primarily on military action against the FDLR, and urge for a new comprehensive approach that emphasises protection of civilians, apprehension of those wanted for genocide and a reformed voluntary disarmament and demobilisation programme.  Implementing an adequate justice system is also key to ensuring confidence in the state is restored. IPS: Are human rights abusers currently held accountable?AA: The Congolese government has just announced a zero tolerance policy.  This is very welcome, but the policy is still very new.  Oxfam does not have any information at this time on the effectiveness of the policy or the effectiveness of the military justice system.  We understand that some human rights violators have been tried.  The U. N.  peacekeeping forces, in some areas, have also done a good job at training government forces in areas such as conduct and discipline.  IPS: Many people are dislocated and live in constant fear.  What impact has this had on poverty and hunger in the region? AA: Because Oxfam has a strong humanitarian system, we have worked to ensure that people are not hungry and able to access their basic needs.  But we do have some difficulties with this.  There are areas, where there is ongoing fighting, that are not safe for humanitarian agencies to enter, such as parts of North Kivu.  If they're not reached, people are basically cut off from access to most services.  People in camps and living with host families are probably better off than those who have fled their homes to escape the looting and violence. IPS: Is there access to clean water and sanitation?AA: People in camps and host communities are getting clean water and have sanitation facilities.  However, those who have fled fighting, many have fled to the bush.  Oxfam has developed methods to help these people have access to clean water, without making them, or us, targets.  But it's very difficult.  Oxfam provides water trucks to areas where we have heard people have fled.  But for security reasons we cannot have the truck in the same place every day, so we change it.  In conflict-affected areas, we know that clean water, adequate sanitation and good health are keys to ensuring that people are able not only just to live, but to live with dignity.  But because the populations here are on the move, we really do not have any good statistics on their health status. IPS: Is there any likelihood of the DRC achieving any of the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) by 2015?AA: I think from having said all the above, you can assume that the conflict is going hurt DRC's ability to meet the MDGs tremendously. 