A survey commissioned by Al Jazeera in Pakistan has revealed a widespread  disenchantment with the United States for interfering with what most people  consider internal Pakistani affairs. The polling was conducted by Gallup Pakistan, an affiliate of the Gallup  International polling group, and more than 2,600 people took part. Interviews were conducted across the political spectrum in all four of the  country's provinces, and represented men and women of every economic and  ethnic background. When respondents were asked what they consider to be the biggest threat to  the nation of Pakistan, 11 percent of the population identified the Taliban  fighters, who have been blamed for scores of deadly bomb attacks across the  country in recent years. Another 18 percent said that they believe that the greatest threat came from  neighbouring India, which has fought three wars with Pakistan since partition  in 1947. But an overwhelming number, 59 percent of respondents, said the greatest  threat to Pakistan right now is, in fact, the U. S. , a donor of considerable  amounts of military and development aid. Tackling the TalibanThe resentment was made clearer when residents were asked about the  Pakistan's military efforts to tackle the Taliban. Keeping with recent trends a growing number of people, now 41 percent,  supported the campaign. About 24 percent of people remained opposed, while another 22 percent of  Pakistanis remained neutral on the question. A recent offensive against Taliban fighters in the Swat, Lower Dir and Buner  districts of North West Frontier Province killed at least 1,400 fighters,  according to the military, but also devastated the area and forced two million  to leave their homes. The military has declared the operation a success, however, some analysts  have suggested that many Taliban fighters simply slipped away to other  areas, surviving to fight another day.  When people were asked if they would support government-sanctioned  dialogue with Taliban fighters if it were a viable option the numbers change  significantly. Although the same 41 percent said they would still support the military  offensive, the number of those supporting dialogue leaps up to 43 percent. So clearly, Pakistanis are, right now, fairly evenly split on how to deal with the  Taliban threat. Drone angerHowever, when asked if they support or oppose the U. S.  military's drone  attacks against what Washington claims are Taliban and al-Qaeda targets,  only nine percent of respondents reacted favourably. A massive 67 percent say they oppose U. S.  military operations on Pakistani  soil. Forty-one percent of Pakistanis say they support the offensive against the  Taliban 'This is a fact that the hatred against the U. S.  is growing very quickly, mainly  because of these drone attacks,' Makhdoom Babar, the editor-in-chief of  Pakistan's The Daily Mail newspaper, said. 'Maybe the intelligence channels, the military channels consider it  productive, but for the general public it is controversial. . .  the drone attacks  are causing collateral damage,' he told Al Jazeera. A senior U. S.  official told Al Jazeera he was not surprised by the poll's  findings. The U. S.  has a considerable amount of work to do to make itself better  understood to the Muslim world, he said. And it would take not only educational and economic work to win over the  Pakistani people but also a concerted effort to help the Pakistani government  deal with 'extremist elements' that are trying to disrupt security within  Pakistan, he added. Nearly 500 people, mostly suspected Taliban and al-Qaeda fighters, are  believed to have been killed in about 50 U. S.  drone attacks since August last  year, according to intelligence agents, local government officials and  witnesses. Washington refuses to confirm the raids, but the U. S.  military in neighbouring  Afghanistan and the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) are the only forces  operating in the area that are known to have the technology. The government in Islamabad formally opposes the attacks saying that they  violate Pakistani sovereignty and cause civilian casualties which turn public  opinion against efforts to battle the Taliban. Lieutenant-General Hamid Nawaz Khan, a former caretaker interior minister  of Pakistan, told Al Jazeera that U. S.  pressure on Pakistan to take on the  Taliban was one reason for the backlash. 'Americans have forced us to fight this 'war on terror'. . .  whatever Americans  wanted they have been able to get because this government was too weak to  resist any of the American vultures and they have been actually committing  themselves on the side of America much more than what even [former  president] Pervez Musharraf did,' he said. Pakistani leadershipThe consensus of opinion in opposition to U. S.  military involvement in  Pakistan is notable given the fact that on a raft of internal issues there is a  clear level of disagreement, something which would be expected in a country  of this size. When asked for their opinions on Asif Ali Zardari, the current Pakistani  president, 42 percent of respondents said they believed he was doing a bad  job.  Around 11 percent approved of his leadership, and another 34 percent  had no strong opinion either way. That pattern was reflected in a question about Zardari's Pakistan People's  party (PPP). Respondents were asked if they thought the PPP was good or bad for the  country. About 38 percent said the PPP was bad for the country, 20 percent believed it  was good for the country and another 30 percent said they had no strong  opinion.   Respondents were even more fractured when asked for their views on how  the country should be led. By far, the largest percentage would opt for Nawaz Sharif, a former prime  minister and leader of the Pakistan Muslim League-N (PML-N) party, as  leader.  At least 38 percent backed him to run Pakistan. Last month, the Pakistani supreme court quashed Sharif's conviction on  charges of hijacking, opening the way for him to run for political office again. Zardari 'unpopular'Zardari, the widower of assassinated former prime minister Benazir Bhutto,  received only nine percent support, while Reza Gilani, Pakistan's prime  minister, had the backing of 13 percent. The survey suggests Sharif is Pakistan's most popular politician by some  distance [AFP] But from there, opinions vary greatly.  Eight percent of the  population would support a military government, 11 percent back a political  coalition of the PPP and the PML-N party. Another six percent would throw their support behind religious parties and  the remaining 15 per cent would either back smaller groups or simply do not  have an opinion. Babar told Al Jazeera that Zardari's unpopularity was understandable given  the challenges that the country had faced since the September 11, 2001  attacks on the U. S. 'Any president in Pakistan would be having the same popularity that  President Zardari is having, because under this situation the president of  Pakistan has to take a lot of unpopular decisions,' he said. 'He is in no position to not take unpopular decisions that are actually in the  wider interests of the country, but for common people these are very  unpopular decisions. '*Published under an agreement with Al Jazeera. 