Basir 'Steve' Ahmed was returning from a bomb-clearing mission in Khogyani  district in northeastern Afghanistan when a suicide bomber blew up an  explosive-filled vehicle nearby.  The blast flipped the military armoured truck  Ahmed was riding in three or four times, and filled it with smoke.  The Afghan  translator had been accompanying the 927th Engineer Company near the  Pakistan border on that October day in 2008 that would forever change his life. 'I saw the gunner come out and I followed him.  The U. S.  Army soldiers helped  pull me out, but I got burns,' says Ahmed, who had worked as a contract  translator with U. S.  troops for almost four years.  'The last thing I remember  was the ‘dub-dub-dub’ of a Chinook helicopter. ' A medical evacuation team  took the injured men to a U. S.  Army hospital at Bagram Base. Three days later Ahmed regained consciousness, but was suffering from  shrapnel wounds in his scalp and severe burns covering his right hand and  leg. A little more than three months after his accident, Ahmed was fired by his  employer, Mission Essential Personnel (MEP) of Columbus, Ohio - the largest  supplier of translators to the U. S.  military in Afghanistan.  In a statement  released to this reporter, the company said that Ahmed’s 'military point of  contact (POC) informed MEP that Basir was frequently late and did not show  up on several occasions.  A few days later, Basir’s POC called MEP’s manager  and told her that they were not able to use him and requested a new linguist. 'Ahmed says he missed only one day of work and arrived late twice. Today, he lives in hiding in nearby Jalalabad for fear that his family will be  targeted because he had worked with the U. S.  military.  The 29-year-old has  no job and had to wait nine months for disability compensation to pay for  medical treatment for the burns that still prevent him from lifting his hand to  his mouth to feed himself. Ahmed is one of dozens of local Afghans who have been abandoned or poorly  treated by a complex web of U. S.  contractors, their insurance companies, and  their military counterparts despite years of service risking life and limb to  help the U. S.  military in the ongoing war in Afghanistan. 'I Trust Him With My Life'On a table inside a safe house in Kabul, Basir Ahmed placed dozens of  photos, certificates of appreciation, and letters of recommendation from the  U. S.  military units he had worked with between 2005 and 2009.  Some  pictures showed him in Nuristan wearing T-shirts and wraparound  sunglasses and sitting next to the sandbags and concrete barriers.  In others,  he stood in camouflage gear in the depths of winter next to a snowman. For example, Sergeant David R.  Head and First Lieutenant Candace N.  Mathis  of the Provincial Reconstruction Team at Task Force Spartan at the Kamdesh  base wrote on Dec.  22, 2006 that: 'his performance was superb and very  professional.  He works well as a linguist, and is always punctual. 'On May 11, 2008, Ahmed received a certificate of appreciation from  Lieutenant Colonel Anthony O.  Wright of the 70th Engineer Battalion  (Kodiaks) for his help as an interpreter during the road-clearing programme  from 2006 to 2008. It was just five months later, on a similar patrol with the 927th Engineer  Company, that Ahmed was injured.  At the Bagram Base, the military doctors  did some skin grafts, but after about 11 days, sent him to an Afghan military  hospital in Kabul.  For two to three months he could not sleep properly -  scaring his family when he woke up yelling. Then Gabby Nelson - the MEP site manager - summoned Ahmed back to  Jalalabad, where she had the military doctors look at him again.  For about 15  days, they treated the burns.  He had to report to the gate of the base at 7  a. m.  in the middle of winter for Nelson to drive him to the hospital one  kilometre away - too far to walk with his injuries.  She was often an hour late,  he said, a painful and cold delay, but when he asked her to be more punctual,  she said she would stop picking him up.  He stopped going to the hospital. Two weeks later Ahmed says Nelson asked him to report for a 12-hour shift  starting at 6 a. m.  despite the doctors’ recommendation for a month’s rest.   After working for the full month, he received 578 dollars, significantly less  than the 845 dollars that he normally earned. Then as luck would have it, he says, he missed work once and was late twice,  because of delays on the road to the base, where the Afghan and U. S.  forces  often tied up traffic with their manoeuvres, he explained.  Nelson told him to  turn in his badge.  He tried to appeal to the military, but they said they  couldn’t help him - so he left the base on Jan.  24, 2009. Soldiers who had previously worked with Ahmed, confirmed the certificates  of appreciation and recommendations about his punctuality and the quality of  his work.  'He did his job diligently and willingly.  He served with us during the  most uncomfortable times, but never complained,' said one soldier, who  asked to remain anonymous. Official ResponseAhmed’s employer - Ohio-based Mission Essential Personnel - was awarded  a five-year contract in September 2007 by the U. S.  Army Intelligence and  Security Command (INSCOM).  The contract, to provide 1,691 translators in  Afghanistan, is worth up to 414 million dollars. MEP spokesman Sean Rushton says that the company did the best it could to  help Ahmed with his medical needs.  'A desire to improve treatment of  linguists is what began our company,' said the spokesman. Rushton and MEP’s senior management said that they were pained to hear  that Basir was upset at being 'let go. ''Anyone reading an account of a translator who was simply let go by a  company after being wounded would of course be outraged at the company,  but that not only isn’t true in this instance, exactly the opposite is the case,'  the company said in a statement released to the media. 'We have financial records showing seven disability and salary payments  between his injury and the final settlement.  It has been said Basir [Ahmed]  received insufficient medical care, yet MEP employees not only ensured his  medical coverage, they regularly took him to his treatment and got him into a  U. S.  military hospital,' the company stated. 'It has been suggested Basir waited endlessly for his disability settlement, yet  the funds arrived within six weeks of his rehabilitation’s conclusion.  It has  been suggested MEP forced Basir to return to work when he was still  recuperating, yet MEP had no financial incentive to do so and in fact, at  Basir’s request, MEP got him onto accommodated duty, free of physical  hardship.  It has been suggested MEP cut Basir loose after he was dismissed  by his military supervisor, yet MEP was and is anxious to help Basir, including  by considering him for a new job. 'Reached by phone for his response to MEP’s statement, Ahmed says that he  did get disability payments such as a check for 10,000 dollars sent to him in  early July 2009 - nine months after he was injured.  Yet he still feels that his  employer and the military abandoned him. But he has not been completely forgotten.  About two months after leaving his  job, he started receiving death threats.  'Believe me, my family is too scared.   One day I saw a night letter from the Taliban.  They put it in our door: ‘You  three brothers work for the U. S.  Army.  Quit your job.  Otherwise we are going  to kill your whole family,’' he says. Like many of his colleagues, Ahmed had kept his employment a secret from  his neighbours, he believes that the injuries provided a clue about the true  nature of his occupation to Taliban sympathizers in the community. (*This is the first of a two-part investigative series on translators in  Afghanistan by Pratap Chatterjee. )(ENDS/IPS/NA/MM/AC/AN/DK/EL/BW/PC/MJS/09)