Facing a worsening security situation in Afghanistan, as well as rapidly  approaching elections in that country, the Obama Administration is touting a  new, broad approach to winning the fight against insurgent groups in  Afghanistan and Pakistan. Ambassador Richard Holbrooke, the U. S.  Special Representative to  Afghanistan and Pakistan, spoke at the Centre for American Progress  Wednesday about the civilian component to the new U. S.  approach in  Afghanistan and Pakistan. Holbrooke was joined by a panel of ten individuals from his interagency  team, which represents nine agencies that are working together on the U. S. - Afghanistan-Pakistan civilian effort. Holbrooke’s team members represented a variety of facets of the U. S.  civilian  strategy in the region, including agriculture, governance, media and  communications, and investigations into terrorist financing. Holbrooke stressed the incremental nature of the civilian effort, pointing out  that defeat and victory are not yet relevant terms to use in terms of civil  society programmes.  'The payoff is still to come.  We have to produce results,  and we understand that, and we’re not here today to tell you we’re winning or  we’re losing.  We’re not here today to say we’re optimistic or pessimistic. ''We're here to tell you that we are in this fight in a different way, with a  determination to succeed,' he added. Though several members of Holbrooke’s panel stressed that the fates of  Afghanistan and Pakistan are intertwined, much of the discussion focused on  military and civilian efforts in Afghanistan. Holbrooke explained the apparent prioritisation of Afghanistan by saying that  the Taliban and Al Qaeda 'are basically fighting in support of one another, so  they are allies. ' He also observed, 'If you abandon the struggle in  Afghanistan, you will suffer against Al Qaeda as well. 'The broadening of strategy comes at a particularly difficult time for U. S.   troops in Afghanistan.  July saw 40 U. S.  military casualties, the highest  monthly total yet in Afghanistan, and 18 U. S.  soldiers have been killed so far  in August. In an Aug.  10 article in The Wall Street Journal, General Stanley McChrystal,  commander of U. S.  troops in Afghanistan, acknowledged the worsening  situation there, saying that the Taliban are threatening formerly secured  areas in the north and west, and that 'U. S.  casualties are likely to remain high  for months to come. 'McChrystal is expected to report to Obama this September about the situation  in Afghanistan, at which point the decision will be made whether to send  more troops. Much of the recent escalation of violence in Afghanistan has come from the  Taliban - in anticipation of upcoming elections, set for Aug.  20. The Taliban has vowed to derail the elections, urging Afghanis not to vote  and calling the election a 'seductive U. S.  process. 'U. S.  President Barack Obama has called the upcoming elections 'the most  important event this year in Afghanistan,' and both the U. S.  and the larger  international community are working to ensure that those elections go as  smoothly as possible. Jane Marriott, Senior Advisor to the Special Representative for Afghanistan  and Pakistan, conceded on Wednesday that the elections 'are being held in  very difficult security conditions, and they won’t be perfect. 'Still, she said, the U. S.  is working to help the election and campaign process  along; one example Marriott cited is the U. S.  providing media capacity and  transportation to candidates, helping them to 'campaign properly. 'According to Rina Amiri, Senior Advisor on Afghanistan for the Office of the  Special Representative to Afghanistan and Pakistan, the anticipation of the  election has reached a fever pitch in Afghanistan, both among candidates and  voters. 'This is the most candidates that have competed for an election,' said Amiri,  referring to the 41 presidential candidates, including 2 women, and the 3,300  people running for 420 seats in the provincial council elections. She also added that 17 million Afghanis - about half of the country’s  population - have registered to vote.  This is up from the roughly 12 million  who registered to vote in the 2004 elections. President Hamid Karzai is considered the leader in the pool of presidential  candidates, though recent polls suggest that he will likely not get the 50  percent of the vote needed to win the presidency outright in the first round  of elections.  If no candidate gets 50 percent, a second round of elections will  be held in October. The Obama Administration and Karzai government have had an at times  rocky relationship.  Karzai has criticised the U. S.  use of private contractors,  and the U. S.  has criticised Karzai’s relationships with prominent Afghani  warlords. However, the Obama Administration stance appears to have softened  recently: the Associated Press reported that Hillary Clinton this week indicated  that the U. S.  will work with whomever wins the Afghan presidential election. This attitude was reflected on Wednesday by members of Holbrooke’s team.   Marriott characterised the U. S.  and the international community as 'actively  impartial in these elections,' and Amiri told IPS that, 'The [U. S. ] embassy  enjoys a good relationship with all of the candidates. 'Amiri also dismissed reports of friction between the U. S.  and Karzai as being  a creation of the media - 'there is a whole other reality that exists at the  press level,' she said, adding, 'I think all of the key candidates are showing  that they are going to be engaging on a constructive level,' regardless of  election outcomes. Post-election, then, is when Holbrooke’s team hopes to work with the  government to push its variety of programmes.  'After this election is settled,'  said Holbrooke, 'we [the international community] will be asking the  government to reinvigorate the leadership in these fields that we’ve heard  today. 'Holbrooke also remarked that, as important as all of his team’s efforts are,  security is a precursor to real success on the civilian front; he noted that a  school or a bridge is useless without the security to use them.  'Of course, you  can’t do civilian growth unless you have security,' he said.  'It’s obvious. '(ENDS/IPS/NA/WD/HD/IP/AC/AN/PK/DK/EL/BW/DK/MJS/09)