U. S.  President Barack Obama awarded the Presidential Medal of Freedom to  former Irish President Mary Robinson Wednesday, despite a vigorous campaign  from hardline supporters of Israel urging him to rescind the award. Critics in Congress and the media claimed that Robinson’s stint as U. N.  high  commissioner on human rights - during which she oversaw the controversial  2001 World Conference Against Racism in Durban, South Africa - marked her  as an incontrovertible enemy of Israel. The campaign against Robinson was the latest in a series of largely symbolic  battles pitting hardliners within the so-called 'Israel lobby' against the  Obama Administration. In particular, many observers saw similarities to the campaign against retired  Ambassador Charles Freeman, who resigned his appointment to a top  intelligence post in March after his public criticisms of Israel prompted a  vitriolic media and congressional campaign against him. But unlike the Freeman affair, the anti-Robinson campaign marked a defeat  for pro-Israel hardliners. 'It failed because it was so far from the pro-Israel lobby’s legitimate area of  interest,' said M. J.  Rosenberg, director of policy analysis for the Israel Policy  Forum.  'They have as much standing to protest a White House award to an  Irish President as they have to protest a Heisman Trophy for best college  [football] quarterback. ''They made themselves look both out of touch with reality and silly,'  Rosenberg told IPS. Obama awarded Robinson one of sixteen Presidential Medals of Freedom in a  White House ceremony, praising her as 'a trail-blazing crusader for women’s  rights in Ireland, and a forceful advocate for equality and human rights  around the world. 'Also honoured Wednesday was Archbishop Desmond Tutu, the Nobel Peace  Prize-winning anti-apartheid crusader who has similarly been attacked for  his criticisms of Israel. The main charge that critics levelled against Robinson was her role in  presiding over the 2001 Durban Conference. The U. S.  and Israel pulled out of the conference after draft text linked Zionism  to racism, charging that the conference had focused disproportionately on  Israel rather than on racism in general. However, Robinson’s defenders argued that she had fought back against the  widespread criticism of Israel at the conference - working to remove anti- Israel language from the final text. In February, the U. S.  pulled out of the sequel to the Durban conference held  in Geneva, informally known as 'Durban II,' due to concerns that it would  similarly become a forum for Israel-bashing. Robinson’s critics also highlighted other statements she had made criticising  Israeli policies as evidence of a deep-seated anti-Israel bias. The anti-Robinson campaign was in many ways similar to the campaign  against Freeman - originating on right-wing blogs before spreading to  mainstream media outlets, pro-Israel organisations, and ultimately Congress. It began on Jul.  30, soon after the announcement of Robinson’s award, with a  blog post by Jennifer Rubin on the website of neo-conservative Commentary  magazine arguing that '[t]here are no words to describe how atrocious a  selection this is. ' Commentary’s blog would serve as one of the loci of the  anti-Robinson campaign over the next two weeks. Other neo-conservative-aligned blogs soon joined in the attacks on  Robinson. The controversy intensified when prominent pro-Israel organisations entered  the fray.  On Aug.  3, the Anti-Defamation League (ADL) called the Robinson  award 'ill-advised. 'The American Israel Public Affairs Committee (AIPAC), the powerful and  hawkish lobbying group, weighed in Aug.  4 with a statement saying that it  was 'deeply disappointed' by the Robinson pick. 'AIPAC respectfully calls on the administration to firmly, fully and publicly  repudiate her views on Israel and her long public record of hostility and one- sided bias against the Jewish state,' the statement said. The AIPAC statement was notable in that the group generally refrains from  publicly criticising U. S.  administrations, particularly on matters that are  tangential to core policy-making issues. During the Freeman affair, for instance, AIPAC did not take a public position  on the controversy, although it quietly furnished anti-Freeman information to  journalists. More liberal U. S.  Jewish organisations, such as J Street and Americans for  Peace Now, declined to get involved in the Robinson controversy. However, Israeli human rights organisations did rally to Robinson’s defence.   On Aug.  10, the leaders of seven such groups issued a statement saying that  'Mrs.  Robinson deserves this honour for a lifetime of unflagging support to  the cause of human rights in its many dimensions. 'The Israeli rights groups added that they were 'greatly saddened by the  media furore that has been generated by statements from AIPAC and the  ADL [which] contain factual errors and are misleading, particularly with  regard to the Durban anti-racism conference. 'Other prominent figures, including American Jewish World Service President  Ruth Messenger and former World Bank head James Wolfensohn, also issued  statements defending Robinson. Robinson herself denounced the attacks on her record as 'totally without  foundation. ''There's a lot of bullying by certain elements of the Jewish community',  Robinson said.  'They bully people who try to address the severe situation in  Gaza and the West Bank. 'Still, the media campaign against Robinson only intensified in the final days  leading up to the awards ceremony.  The attacks spread beyond the confines  of right-wing blogs, as anti-Robinson opinion pieces appeared in The  Washington Post, The Wall Street Journal, and The New Republic, among other  places. The campaign also acquired some momentum in Congress.  Two Democratic  representatives, Eliot Engel of New York and Shelley Berkley of Nevada, issued  statements condemning the pick. On Tuesday, 45 Republicans in the House of Representatives called on  Obama to reconsider the award. But whereas the campaign against Freeman won the support of several key  figures in the congressional Democratic leadership, such as Speaker of the  House Nancy Pelosi and Senator Chuck Schumer, the campaign against  Robinson was unable to attract significant bipartisan support. Aside from Berkley and Engel - both of whom are considered relative outliers  in their hardline support for Israel - no other congressional Democrats  publicly denounced the award. The anti-Robinson forces similarly failed to attract much bipartisan media  support.  Whereas some prominent liberal pundits participated in the anti- Freeman campaign, criticism of Robinson remained largely confined to neo- conservative commentators. Perhaps surprisingly, Robinson’s critics refrained from attacking her fellow  medal recipient Tutu, who has previously been denounced by pro-Israel  hawks for levelling many of the same criticisms of Israeli policies as  Robinson. While the Robinson affair ended in defeat for her critics, few are inclined to  read too much significance into the controversy. The Obama Administration has larger problems to worry about, as it clashes  with Israel over West Bank settlements and how best to deal with Iran’s  nuclear programme.  By all indications, the administration viewed the entire  spat as an unexpected and unwelcome distraction, and many observers  expressed surprise that the award attracted as much attention as it did. Nevertheless, the Robinson controversy is yet another reminder that Israel’s  hardline supporters in the U. S.  retain the ability to create headaches for the  president.  It is unlikely to be the last reminder. 