The border dispute between two close allies, China and Burma, has now been  compounded by concerns over the junta’s future relations with the United  States. The past few weeks have seen a flurry of diplomatic activity between the two  states, with Beijing even issuing some unusually forthright criticism of its  South-east Asian neighbour. Unrest on their common border led to a mass exodus of more than 30,000  Chinese refugees in late August, and fears of a renewed civil war in the area  have alarmed Beijing.  Its officials are also now worried by the Burmese  military regime’s interest in developing closer ties with the U. S. , which has  strong sanctions in place against the junta. 'Beijing has been taken aback by the Burmese junta’s cavalier approach to  their normally strong relationship,' said Win Min, a Burmese academic based  at Chiang Mai University.  'But it is likely to prove to be a hiccup rather than a  major shift in relations. ' Last weekend a government-controlled provincial television channel, based  in Kunming — the capital of Yunnan province which borders northern Burma - - broadcast a Chinese government announcement advising all Chinese  citizens in eastern Burma to return home quickly.  This came on the heels of a formal complaint from China to Burma days  earlier over the way Chinese citizens living in a border region had been  treated during recent clashes between an ethnic militia and Burmese in  August.   In statement issued last week, China's Foreign Ministry said the recent  conflict with the Kokang, in a northeastern Burmese region bordering China,  had 'harmed the rights and interests of Chinese citizens living there. ' The  Burmese government should make sure similar incidents do not happen  again, the statement added.  Burma insists that peace has been restored to the area in question, and most  of the refugees who fled to China had returned.  But there are still thousands  seeking refuge across the border, not just from the Kokang areas, according  to residents living in China along the border with Burma. Right along the border, from the Kachin areas in the east to the Shan areas in  the west, people have fled into China for fear of renewed fighting between  other ethnic rebel groups, especially the Kachin and the Wa, two of Burma’s  larger armed groups, according to Indian entrepreneurs who travel along this  area doing business.  'Everyone fears that the 20-year-old ceasefire agreements have been torn up  by the Burmese generals, and a return to fighting is imminent,' said a Kachin  student living in the Chinese border town of Ruili.  'At the moment, it does not look as though the Burmese army is about to  attack any of the other ethnic rebel groups that have ceasefire agreements,  though there is a lot of posturing going on,' said Win Min.  'There is no doubt  that the regime means to have all the ethnic rebel armies disarm before next  year’s elections and become part of the border guards under the control of  the Burmese army. 'Earlier this year the junta sought the assistance of the former intelligence  chief and prime minister, General Khin Nyunt — who was deposed in Oct.   2004 and is now under house arrest in Rangoon — to help negotiate with  these rebels groups, especially the Wa.  Khin Nyunt had masterminded these ceasefire agreements some 20 years  ago, and was still trusted by many of the ethnic leaders.  He accepted the  junta’s request on condition that his men — some 300 military intelligence  officers who were jailed in the aftermath of Khin Nyunt’s fall — be freed.  The  government refused to accept his condition, and turned to the Chinese — who  have extremely close relations with the key ethnic groups along the border — the Kachin, Kokang and the Wa.  The Chinese reluctance to help angered the  Burmese junta’s leaders.  It is now increasingly evident that a significant rift exists between the two  countries that could have crucial implications for other countries in the  region.  It is also likely to impact any approach that the international  community may take to encourage the Burmese military regime to introduce  real political change. The implications of this growing divergence could also have significant affects  on the border region, as most of the ethnic groups — especially the Kachin,  Kokang and Wa — in this area have ceasefire agreements with the Burmese  junta.  They also have traditionally close ties with the Chinese authorities.   Economically and culturally, the area is certainly closer to China than the  Burmese regime.  Thousands of Chinese businessmen and workers have migrated into northern  Shan state over the last decade seeking employment and economic  opportunities.  Many of these ethnic leaders go to Chinese hospital across the  border for medical treatment and send their children to school in China.  The  Chinese language and even the Chinese currency — the renminbi — is used  throughout the Kokang and Wa areas in northern Shan state. Anything which forces Beijing to choose between their ethnic brothers inside  Burma — the Kokang are ethnically Chinese and the Wa, a Chinese ethnic  minority — and the central government will cause the capital immense  problems.  In the end, it will bring into sharp focus the real nature of the  Burma-China axis. But Beijing is now more worried about Burma’s longer-term allegiance.  The  junta has been China’s key ally and strategic partner in South-east Asia in  the past few years.  So the current overtures between Washington and Burma  have dismayed the Chinese leaders, who remain suspicious of the U. S.   interest in re-engaging with the region and increasing its influence.  Beijing  sees the region as its backyard, and any competition for influence is far from  welcome. Recently Cambodia and Thailand have moved closer to the US, increasing  China’s strategic concerns.  Now its rock-solid ally, evidently hoping for  better relations with the West, has begun to flirt with Washington.  'China will react with measured nervousness to this unwelcome  encroachment into Burma,' Justin Wintle, a British expert on Burma and  biographer of opposition leader Aung San Suu Kyi, told IPS.  Beijing’s current concerns stem from the unstable basis of their bilateral  relationship.  'We are not ‘real’ friends — as (we are) with Thailand, for  example,' said a senior Chinese government official who spoke to IPS on  condition of anonymity.  'It’s a Machiavellian relationship: we are in it for what  we can get out of it, and they are also in it, for what they can get out of it,' he  said.  Thus, it is a relationship that could shift easily, said Chinese diplomats who  spoke with IPS.  'But it is not likely to become antagonistic anytime soon,' said  Win Min.  'Burma is far too economically dependent on China for the  government to really consider ditching Beijing as its main ally. 'More than 90 percent of direct foreign investment in Burma last year was  Chinese.  While the western-led sanctions remain in place, that is unlikely to  change for some time.  The sanctions, of course, now more than ever have  rankled with the regime.  'Sanctions are being employed as a political tool against Myanmar (as Burma  is official called), and we consider them unjust,' the Burmese prime minister,  General Thein Sein, told the U. N.  General Assembly in New York late this  month.  Undoubtedly Burma’s interest in a dialogue with the U. S.  is motivated by the  regime’s main concerns — to have sanctions lifted, for international  humanitarian and development assistance to flow into the country, and to  attract foreign investment.   'Though generals are certainly unhappy about being too dependent on one  supporter, and will be trying to balance Chinese influence with better  relations with the U. S.  as well as other countries — like ASEAN (member  states) and India, they will not be looking to cut the umbilical cord with China  in the near future,' said Win Min. China will now watch with growing concern any further U. S.  overtures to  Burma.  But in the end it is Burma that may hold the upper hand.  China’s  economic, trade and military involvement in Burma gives the junta the upper  hand rather than making them more subservient to Beijing.  The issue now is  how far the junta leaders will go in flexing their muscles.   