‘Give peace a chance’ may just be another cliché for many, but for women who  have suffered the ravages of war, endless strife and other forms of conflict,  joining hands to find meaningful solutions to their collective aspiration lends it a  whole new meaning. Within the South Asian region, Pakistan, India and Afghanistan have for  decades been torn by internal and external conflicts that have cried out for,  but have not quite found, a lasting resolution.  'We waited for a long time to see what the men would do for peace,' Zahira  Khattak, a member the think-tank formed by Pakistan’s Awami National Party  (ANP), told IPS.  For Khattak and scores of other women in this region, not only has peace  proved elusive, they have also been left out of much of the peace efforts by  their respective states.  'Why should this be so?' argued Khattak.  'For 5,000 years women have been  sitting in ‘jirgas’ (tribal councils), at least in Afghanistan.  We have ‘jirgas’ all  over Pakistan’s tribal areas also, and we thought why not introduce this  concept?' Aware of the repercussions of remaining silent on a host of issues, including  peace and security, that affect them as much as men, women today are  increasingly raising their voice in a bid to be heard in the corridors of power  and at the policymaking levels. For months now, women from the three states have been strengthening their  alliances, which they hope will be a vital bridge to peace in their region.   Khattak said that since so many women in these three countries have similar  views on peace, 'we thought why not get together and make our voices heard  by the people in power?''There are many suspicions and mistrust between our three countries,' she  added, 'but sitting together and talking, we find we have so much more in  common. ' Their first trialogue in April 2009 in New Delhi was an auspicious start of  their collective peace efforts.  It followed an all-women peace meeting that  activists in Peshawar, capital of Pakistan’s beleaguered North West Frontier  Province, convened on Women’s Day, March 8, 2009 — a day they celebrated  as ‘Peace Day’, explained Khattak.  Inspired by the results of these meetings, delegates from the three South  Asian countries gathered anew early this month for their second peace  trialogue.  The battered city of Kabul hosted the unusual gathering of women  activists, politicians and journalists. 'We are aware we have so many internal problems,' said Indian journalist Jyoti  Malhotra in an interview with IPS.  'Our armies are conducting operations  against their own people.  .  .  .  I’m not saying we’ve resolved all the questions  or found their answers, but this (trialogue) is a very good start, and it is very  necessary to take it forward. 'Ongoing tensions in Afghanistan, worsened by the contentious outcome of its  recent elections, are a constant reminder of the need to work together to  achieve the elusive dream of a just peace. 'We Afghans are in need of peace,' Afghan parliamentarian Shinkai Karokhel  told the gathering.  'We suffer from insurgency under the banner of religion  or liberation war. . .  We lose our lives, our heritage, our honour, our children,  our schools'Dr Radha Kumar, director of Peace and Conflict Programme of the Delhi Policy  Group, which convened the unconventional 'aman jirga' (peace council),  summed up the aims of the meeting: to 'foster and sustain peace, deal with  conflict and post-conflict situations, fight for women’s rights and human  rights, ensure women’s greater political participation and make women  visible at decision making especially peace negotiation tables. 'The meeting stressed the inclusion of women in peace negotiations,  particularly given the threats they face from warring groups and the constant  need to assert their rights in the face of repressive laws targeted at them.   Speaking at the conference, Afghan activist Nargis Nehan noted that 'most of  the laws and regulations are drafted by (male-dominated) political parties  and government. 'Gatherings like this provide participants with the opportunity to learn from  one another.  'Afghan women have been bearing this conflict for 30 years,'  Pakistani parliamentarian Bushra Gohar of the ANP told IPS.  'It is inspiring to  hear how they have dealt with it. 'Besides sharing experiences, participants focused on trying to find solutions  to their common concerns.  Their draft plan of action included working  towards a Women’s Peace Commission comprising 15 women from the  region, setting up a multi-lingual website to facilitate further exchange of  ideas and experiences, and holding a follow-up trialogue in Pakistan some  time next year.  'Women can be influential if empowered; we represent not just women but  also the men in our lives — colleagues, friends, husbands, brothers, sons,'  said federal minister Aneesa Zeb Tahirkheli of the breakaway Pakistan  People’s Party (Sherpao Group).  While women in the three neighbouring states are slowly building alliances  towards peace, they still have to constantly fight for their right to be heard  and treated as equals in their male-dominated societies. Tahirkheli and Afghan parliamentarian Shukriya Barakzai were among the  hundred or so women who took part in the first Afghanistan-Pakistan peace  ‘jirga’ of August 2007 in Kabul, attended by over 600 chieftains, tribal elders  and politicians.  It remains to be seen, however, whether such gatherings will continue to  include women.  The Aug 2007 ‘jirga’ was supposed to be followed up by a  ‘jirga gai’ (executive council) with 25 representatives from both states and  held in Pakistan.  Although it has yet to be convened, several members have  been nominated to it — but without women, noted Tahirkheli. 'Women should be included like they were in the main ‘jirga’,' Tahirkheli told  IPS.  'Moreover, it should be a continuous process.  Regular meetings will  bring contentious issues to the table and help us move forward. 'But whether they are included in the planned ‘jirga gai’ or not, the women  who trooped to the Kabul trialogue are determined to forge ahead with plans  to meet in Peshawar for their third such gathering next year. Many have stayed in touch with one another, strengthening ties and forging a  common bond built on their collective desire for peace.  It is also a bond that transcends their differences.  Parliamentarian Nafisa Shah of the ruling Pakistan People’s Party said that  women engaged in Pakistan’s Parliamentary Women’s Caucus, which she  chairs, 'have reconciled with our past and . . .  made our differences far smaller  than our common goals. ' The caucus brings together women across the party  divide. Such alliances are manifestly no longer confined to Pakistan’s parliament.   Within the region, at least among women, broader alliances are taking shape.  The process may not yield any immediate results, but the very fact that it is  continuing bodes well for the prospects of genuine and lasting peace in the  region.  