It is a story that spans three islands, across the breadth of the Indian Ocean.   That is, of hundreds of boat people sailing the rough seas in unseaworthy  vessels, risking life and limb in their desperate attempt at a new lease of life. Their journey begins from Sri Lanka, only to switch boats in Indonesia and  use the South-east Asian country as staging point to their target final  destination—Australia.  Once apprehended by authorities, some find  themselves back in Indonesian waters, awaiting their fate.  More than 300 remain on board two boats that have been moored in  Indonesian waters since early October—one boat has been marooned for six  weeks, the other about four weeks.  The saga of the boat people, especially after over 10 went who went missing  were presumed dead when their boat sank off the north western coast  Australia on Nov.  3, has undermined the popularity of the Kevin Rudd  government in Australia.  Like the journey of the boat people, the damage  control measures also span the ocean.  Australian Foreign Minister Stephen Smith’s trip to Sri Lanka on Nov.  9, along  with top immigration officials, was clearly born out of concerns to seek out  ways to stem the rising wave of human trafficking originating from Sri Lanka  and ending in Australia—or more to the point, stop people trying to get to  Australian territory illegally.  In the last two months two boats have been detected in Indonesian waters  and escorted to an Indonesian harbour.  Another, also with Sri Lankans  onboard, sank in the seas northwest of Australia.  At least 10 are still missing  while 27 were taken to Christmas Island in Australia.  'We face a heightened challenge from the syndicates behind people  smuggling,' Smith said in Colombo, where he held high-level discussions  with Sri Lankan President Mahinda Rajapaksa, Foreign Minister Rohitha  Bogollagama, and the ministers for law and Justice Milinda Moragoda and  human rights during his brief stay.  The two countries agreed to set up a joint  ministerial-level commission to oversee progress in curbing trafficking. 'People smuggling remains a high-priority transnational issue for source,  transit and destination countries in our region.  It presents a threat to the  integrity of border security processes and procedures,' the two ministers said  in a joint statement at the conclusion of the Smith visit.  'We note that people  smugglers and people smuggling syndicates work without regard for human  safety or national legal frameworks. 'The ministers added that enhanced cooperation would be directed at  prosecution, disruption of trafficking routes and measures and information  sharing, but details of the joint action were not made available.  The Sri Lankans have consistently maintained that the smuggling syndicates  are part of the international network maintained by the now defunct  Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE), which fought a bloody two-and-half  decade-old separatist war till just five months back.  'Sri Lanka’s stand has  always been that people smuggling is part of the terrorist activities  associated with the LTTE,' Bogollagama said.  In fact, the Sri Lankan authorities have already informed the Indonesia and  Australia that one of the passengers on board the Oceanic Viking, a boat with  250 Sri Lankans that has remained at the Merak harbour in Banten Province,  Indonesia, was a known people’s smuggler.  'Kulaendrarajah Sanjeev alias ‘Alex’ once belonged to ‘Kannan Gang’ involved  in street fights and was deported from Canada in 2003 after being arrested  for trouble making,' the Sri Lankan Foreign Ministry said in a statement  released on Nov.  6.  'Alex had been involved in human smuggling for a long time and it is  believed that his office is based in India.  His brother, who is now in Canada,  is also involved in human smuggling. 'In a related development, explosive residue was found on two clothing items  discovered among passengers on a boat with 76 illegal Sri Lankan  immigrants, which was seized by Canadian authorities off Vancouver Island  earlier in October.  The ship’s identity has also come into question with  reports indicating that it may have been part of a fleet used by the LTTE for  gunrunning.  Sri Lankans are wary of overseas groups trying to revive the LTTE that was  completely wiped out in Sri Lanka with the deaths of its top leadership during  battles with the government forces in May.  'We know that the LTTE is trying  to regroup overseas and we are taking measures,' Bogollagama said.  The Sri Lankan Foreign Minister said that he hoped 'the government of  Australia will remain vigilant and mindful in this regard,' referring to  attempts to revive the Tigers as a group based outside Sri Lanka.  Sri Lanka has been campaigning vigorously in bilateral and multilateral fora  against such a revival since the end of the war.  The LTTE, which is banned in  India, the U. S.  and Canada among other countries, is not outlawed in  Australia.  Smith did not indicate that such a ban was likely in the near future.  Australia also faces another problem—what to do with the more than 300 Sri  Lankans remaining on the two boats anchored in Indonesian waters in hopes  of landing on Australian territory and refusing to come offshore in Indonesia —a message they have conveyed in no uncertain terms in a letter they  handed to the media.  Indonesia has given Australia until the end of this week  to decide on the status of the boat passengers.  'They should leave the boat and they would be processed under Indonesian  law,' Smith said of the option that had been suggested to the asylum  seekers.  But there have been no takers among the marooned asylum seekers.  Sri Lankan authorities said that it was difficult for boats carrying human  cargo to leave the eastern coast of Sri Lanka undetected.  A heavy naval  dragnet, including deep-sea vessels, has been in place off the eastern and  southeastern waters of Sri Lanka since more than two years ago to prevent  arms smuggling by the Tigers.  'Even the local fishermen have passes, and when they reach fishing  marshalling points, which are manned by the navy, they have to produce  these passes.  Our job is to protect incoming and outgoing vessels and to  monitor everything that passes through our seas, and that’s what we do,'  Navy spokesperson Athula Senarath told the national media on Nov.  4 in Sri  Lanka following reports in Australia that the boats were originating from  eastern Sri Lanka.  Some of the marooned passengers have revealed that they got on the boat to  Australia after reaching Indonesia from Sri Lanka.  Smith admitted that if the authorities were to deal with the smuggling  networks effectively, it would need a combined effort spanning across  oceans.  'This is not a challenge the Australian or the Sri Lankan  (governments) can meet by themselves,' he said. A meeting of the over 50 countries who are signatories to the Bali Process—a  regional and multilateral initiative designed to boost bilateral and regional  efforts to prevent people smuggling and trafficking—will be held in Australia  early next year to map out a regional strategy, Smith announced. For the time being, though, the first question that needs answers is what to  do with the passengers refusing to come ashore in Merak, Indonesia.  That is a  question that only the Rudd administration can answer.   On Nov.  11 it gave them an option—get off the boat; those registered as  refugees will be processed immediately and resettled within six weeks, and  others will go through the process within 12 weeks—the catch being they  have to come ashore in Indonesia for the asylum process to begin.  Twenty people have come forward to avail themselves of this option.  Yet the  saga continues.  