Pictures of missing people have been hanging for years next to the gate to the  fence surrounding Kosovo’s parliament.  Some of them have been there for so  long that the features of the faces can hardly be seen anymore - a good  example of how slow and painful the process of discovering the fate of the  missing is. Ten years after the end of the war here there are still more than 1,000 people  from Kosovo in the list of missing persons kept by the International  Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC).  But, despite limited capacity and  infrastructure, people at the department of forensic investigations in Pristina  keep searching for the missing. In the forensic lab, Director Arsim Gerxhaliu, points with a small plastic bar at  the bullet holes on the back of the skull of two recently recovered skeletons. 'Even in cases of a point blank execution so clear like this one we do not  make conclusions,' he says, bending over the remains to explain how  research into new findings takes place in order to gather as much evidence as  possible in order to help accurately identify who this person has been.  'Our  job finishes with suggesting an accusation to judicial authorities,' he adds. War in Kosovo between Albanian guerrillas and Serbian security forces lasted  through 1998, and up to the spring of 1999 when the former Yugoslav  Republic security forces withdrew from the region as a result of a three  months long NATO bombing campaign against Serbia.  Today it is estimated  that between 12,000 and 13,000 people fell victims to the hostilities during  that time. Some people initially considered missing were identified and found to be  alive immediately after the war when a huge wave of refugees returned as the  region moved towards post war normalcy. 'There were still 5,600 Albanians, Serbs and others declared missing in  Kosovo when the forensic department was established in 2002,' forensic  anthropologist Alan Robinson told IPS.  'Today we are still counting 1,885  unaccounted persons in the ICRC’s list. ''Searching for missing people after such a long time is a difficult task.  It is  difficult to find valid information or recall peoples’ memories.  There are cases  of fearful informants and witnesses or families who are not willing to provide  information fearing for their well being. 'According to Robinson one of the toughest tasks investigators face is to  identify the site of a grave, 'a purely forensic approach would not get us far,  so we have developed an outreach branch. 'Valuable information is available everywhere he says, 'Civil society might have  info which they don’t consider relevant.  Some other things are derived  through ICRC.  Important meetings between the Pristina and Belgrade  committees responsible for missing persons take place two or three times per  year during which essential information sometimes is exchanged.  Then there  are less orthodox ways, sometimes we are approached confidentially by  someone who has been present in an incident and wants to talk. 'Progress is slow but steady.  There have been 120 field operations this year.   The 68 completed exhumations resulted in recovery of 78 remains of  individuals - some of which have already been identified. Following exhumation experts create the biological profile of a person that  concentrates information about the sex and age plus any skeletal fractures or  dental details which would assist in identification.  Still, identifying remains  depends on a DNA examination comparing blood samples from possible  relatives with DNA extracted from the remains of a body. The infrastructure for such examination is unavailable in Kosovo thus  samples are sent to the city of Tuzla in Bosnia, where a specialised lab has  been developed to help the country deal with the massive numbers of  unknown persons after the war there. Some bodies were re-buried during the war - most often in an attempt of  perpetrators to hide their crimes.  Despite no strong scenarios of mass  executions and mass graves in Kosovo some high profile cases have  illustrated the virulence of this short-term conflict. The most known case is the mass grave of Batajnica, just outside Belgrade, in  which many bodies from Kosovo where placed in an attempt by Serbian  security forces to cover up war crimes during their withdrawal. 'Attempts to remove war crime evidence intensified during the vacuum  between the end of NATO’s operations on Jun.  10, 1999 and the complete  removal of Federal Republic of Yugoslavia forces eleven days later… which  signalled the cessation of hostilities,' says Gerxhaliu.  Eight hundred bodies  out of the 900 found in Batajnica have been recovered and returned to  Kosovo so far. The date of the Yugoslav withdrawal is set as a timeline for the  characterisation of an incident as a war crime.  'Any case defined to have  happened before Jun.  22, 1999 is possibly a war crime,' according to  Gerxhaliu.  'In that case responsibility is offered to a special war crime unit  run by the European Union Rule of Law Mission (EULEX). 'EULEX is the largest European mission ever.  It arrived in Kosovo after the  declaration of independence in February 2008 with a mandate to assist the  newborn state in legal and judicial capacity building.  Since then the forensic  department has been integrated into the mission. Experts from the department were involved in the ‘Yellow House’  investigation that came to light when former High Prosecutor of the  International Tribunal for Former Yugoslavia Carla Del Ponte’s book was  released in April 2008.  It included allegations concerning the possible  trafficking by Kosovo Albanian paramilitaries of 400 prisoners’ organs from a  mysterious yellow house near the Albanian town of Burrel.  The fate of those  missing people remains still unknown. Investigative efforts on missing persons conclude when families are contacted  and provided with all information regarding the cause, place, and time of  death of relatives.  'It is a tough thing and it is always done in person.  People  need to know these things,' says Kristiina Herodes, press officer with EULEX.   'Cases close with the finalisation of a case’s report, publishing a death  certificate, handing over the remains to relatives and removing a person from  ICRC’s list. '