East Timor’s leaders say bringing to justice perpetrators of atrocities committed  during the Indonesian army’s occupation would sour relations between the  neighbouring countries, but not everyone is so keen to forgive and move on. Despite high-level stubbornness, justice can still be achieved so long as  people continue to make their voices heard, observers said.  'Speaking about justice is part of achieving justice, just as speaking about  independence was part of achieving independence' Dr Clinton Fernandes, an  East Timor expert from the Australian Defence Force Academy, told IPS. 'Citizens—like the U. N.  [United Nations]—do not have their own military or  police forces but can create the political will to achieve justice simply by  always speaking about it,' he added. For years, the people of East Timor and international supporters have pushed  for closure on the crimes against humanity committed during the Indonesian  military occupation between 1975 and 1999. East Timor became independent in 2002, but at a cost of 180,000 lives,  either killed in the violence or else left to die of starvation or sickness.  The nation’s leadership is sticking to the line that if riled, Indonesia might  close the border with West Timor, lock down trade ties or reconsider the  futures of the 6,000 or so Timorese students studying in Indonesia. In August, Amnesty International released the report ‘We Cry for Justice’, in  which one of the recommendations was for the U. N.  Security Council to set up  a comprehensive plan to end impunity. The report has now been translated into Tetum (one of East Timor’s official  languages) and Bahasa Indonesia in the hope that people in East Timor and  Indonesia will be able to see that their voices are being heard. 'Every voice counts to see change on the ground, including media coverage  on justice issues,' said Isabelle Arradon, researcher on Indonesia and East  Timor for Amnesty International. 'Continuous coverage in the lead-up to discussions on [East Timor] at the  U. N.  Security Council in February 2010 is welcomed to show that the  international community supports the calls of the victims on the ground, and  to remind U. N.  Security Council members that the view of the [East Timor]  government is not shared by many in the country,' she added. The firm stance of the nation’s leaders has been criticised by the U. N. , which  maintains that strong ties with Indonesia should not impede the need for  justice. 'To ask for accountability of the individuals who did really horrible things in  no way undermines that [relationship]—it only strengthens it,' said Louis  Gentile, representative of the U. N.  High Commissioner for Human Rights. With the recent passing of yet another East Timor massacre anniversary, there  is disillusionment on the streets of Dili. Julio Barreto, 36, was there at Santa Cruz in Dili on Nov.  12, 1991, when  Indonesian troops sprayed bullets into crowds of peaceful protesters, killing  270 of them.  'We didn’t realize the troops were preparing to shoot at us,' he  said.  'I don’t like them—the people who did this—they are well known as  human rights violators, and everyone knows what they have been involved  in. 'Like many in East Timor, Barreto feels let down by his country’s heads of  state for the lack of accountability for the Santa Cruz Massacre and other  crimes against humanity. 'Instead of stressing out and thinking of those things that might never  happen, I prefer to concentrate on work instead of thinking too much about  bringing those people to justice, because it would take the leaders to do it,  not the ordinary people like us. 'The issue of justice has been a sensitive one for previous governments, but  perhaps none has been scrutinised as much as Xanana Gusmao’s current  ruling coalition, most notably in recent weeks when the release of an  Indonesian former militia leader sparked an international media frenzy. Maternus Bere, former commander of the pro-Indonesia Laksaur militia, was  indicted by the U. N.  Serious Crimes Unit for a bevy of crimes against  humanity, including his part in the Suai Church Massacre in 1999, in which  up to 200 innocent people were slaughtered.  Bere crossed the border from neighbouring West Timor and returned to Suai,  a city in East Timor, in August to visit his family.  He was arrested and ordered  by the court in Suai to be detained, but directives came from Gusmao to  release him into the custody of the Indonesian embassy in Dili on Aug.  30 as  celebrations marking 10 years since the nation voted for independence  began. Bere spent a secretive two months at the embassy before being taken back to  Indonesia on Oct.  30, making him a free man. In 2003, the Serious Crimes Unit indicted 391 people, including Bere, for  crimes against humanity committed in East Timor, and yet most of them have  lived as free men in Indonesia.  The initial decision to release Bere could have toppled the government as the  opposition Fretilin party and allies tabled a vote of no confidence that was  debated on Oct.  12.  Gusmao defended himself, calling it a 'political decision' to free Bere. '[Indonesian foreign] minister Hassan… said that should there be no solution  to the case of Martenus Bere, it could affect the relationship between the two  countries,' Gusmao told parliament.  'He added that our refusal to cooperate  in such a sensitive matter for Indonesia might force the Indonesian state to  review their diplomatic policy towards [East Timor]. 'Gusmao’s government survived the no-confidence vote in what observers  said was a sign of political stability in the country, but the justice issue is one  that refuses to simmer down. 'The struggle for justice is not a contest between Indonesians and non- Indonesians.  Rather, it is a contest between those around the world who want  justice to prevail and those who want to see impunity prevail,' said Dr  Fernandes at the memorial rites in October for Sander Thoenes, the ‘Financial  Times’ correspondent murdered in East Timor 10 years ago. 