In an instant the Philippines emerged as the world’s most dangerous place for  journalists, effectively displacing Iraq, which, until the massacre in an  impoverished town in southern Philippines, held that dubious distinction. The Philippines had previously occupied the fourth spot, next to Somalia,  Iraq, and Pakistan, according to the New York-based Committee to Protect  Journalists.  A day after the gruesome killing of at least 57 innocent civilians in  Maguindanao province—located some 1,000 kilometres south of Manila—the  Brussels-based International Federation of Journalists dubbed the Philippines  'the most dangerous place in the world for media workers. 'On Nov.  23, at least 60 individuals were sprayed with bullets—and made to  suffer unimaginable atrocities before being buried in shallow graves—en  route to the office of the Commission on Elections in Shariff Aguak, the  capital of the province.  Tagged as the prime suspect in the cold-blooded murders in Ampatuan town  in Maguindanao is the son of the province’s political patriarch—Datu Unsay  Mayor Andal Ampatuan, Jr. , 39—against whom vice-mayor Ishmael  Mangudadatu of Buluan town in the province was set to run as governor in  next year’s elections. Mangudadatu—having previously received death threats that he claimed  came from the Ampatuan clan since he was vying for the gubernatorial post  to be vacated by the elder Ampatuan—sent his wife, accompanied by a  retinue of supporters, to file his certificate of candidacy, confident that the  time-honored Muslim tradition of respecting women would hold sway over  potential assailants.  But he was deathly wrong. The National Union of Journalists of the Philippines (NUJP), in its statement  issued on Nov.  28, said the massacre in Ampatuan town, Maguindanao, went  beyond a ‘rido’ or clan war involving families in an endless cycle of  vengeance that often results in killing and other acts of retaliation. 'Women, lawyers and journalists—no one escaped the butchers’ wrath.  The  murderers had planned the deed, down to the mass burial of victims.  That is  the mark of the untouchable,' said NUJP. 'The Ampatuan massacre not only highlights the capacity for abuse by a  political clan that has acted as ruler, judge, jury and executioner in its feudal  turf; it is the graphic proof that State forces actually abet crime and protect  criminals who provide favors for government officials. 'Other media groups, within and outside the country, were quick to denounce  the killings.  'The massacre of journalists in Maguindanao staggers our community.  It is a  crime of such scale and horror that is incomparable to anything we have  seen,' said a joint statement issued by the International Freedom of  Expression Exchange.  'We are especially appalled by the most recent media  reports that at least 28 of those killed in the province of Maguindanao on 23  November 2009 were journalists. 'Gavin O’Reilly, president of the World Association of Newspapers and News  Publishers, called it 'an act of savagery that has written one of the blackest  pages in the history of the world’s press' in an international gathering this  week of media publishers in Hyderabad, India. The journalists who died in the bloody assaults were invited to cover what  had been described as one of the most important events in Maguindanao’s  recent political history, since hardly anyone had dared go against its 'political  warlords' in previous elections.  The other slain victims included the wife, kin and lawyers of Mangudadatu.  The prompt denunciations of the killings by media groups all over the world  only serve to highlight the extent of human rights violations in a country that  has not only been dubbed the most dangerous place for journalists but has  likewise been declared a dangerous place for ordinary civilians based on the  country’s record of extrajudicial killings, enforced disappearances and other  forms of abuses.  Many have asked: If women and journalists could become the targets of  wanton killings, is anyone still safe in a country that prides itself on being a  bastion of democracy in Asia?This year, the International Trade Union Confederation ranked the Philippines  first in Asia and third globally in terms of the number of trade union  members killed in 2008, making it one of the most dangerous places in the  world even for laborers.  The latest round of savage killings in the country further served to exemplify  the magnitude of human rights abuses in the Philippines and the inability—if  not apathy, in the view of some—of the government to reverse the cycle of  violence in the country.  The barbarous killings in Maguindanao have unmasked its political dynasty  that for far too long has lorded over a province where the scale of savagery is  matched only by the impunity with which many say it is committed and where  the extent of alleged corruption has hounded the ruling clan since it took  over the reins of power.  Maguindanao is considered the second poorest province in southern  Philippines and the poorest in the Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao  (ARMM), where half of the estimated three million population languish in  extreme poverty.  The governor of ARMM—composed of five of the country’s  predominantly Muslim provinces, including Maguindanao—is Zaldy  Ampatuan, older brother of Ampatuan, Jr. Monday’s mayhem, although of a scale unmatched by previously reported  atrocities in the province, was far from unprecedented. In 2003, shortly after the death in an explosion of Datu Saudi Ampatuan,  another of the 30 or so sons sired by four wives of the Ampatuan patriarch,  Maguindanao governor Andal Ampatuan, Sr. , a number of people suspected  of complicity in his son’s death were murdered in a manner not unlike the  bestiality perpetrated late last month. The Ampatuans reportedly blamed the explosion—and the favorite son’s  death—on the Moro International Liberation Front (MILF), a Muslim separatist  rebel group based in Mindanao.  The MILF was said to have an axe to grind  against the Ampatuans, known throughout Mindanao to have supported the  national government’s all-out war against the Muslim secessionists in 1998  under the administration of former President Joseph Estrada, Arroyo’s  predecessor.  MILF denied they were behind the explosion that killed Datu Saudi.  Individuals suspected of involvement in the attack against Datu Saudi—then  mayor of Datu Piang, still another town in the province—and the others who  died with him were targeted for annihilation.  And vanish many of them did,  who numbered about a hundred.  Those that managed to escape the  perpetrators’ wrath did so by the skin of their teeth. A top official of a government agency in Central Mindanao, whose vehicle was  spotted at the site of the deadly explosion, fled his home soon after receiving  a warning that he was ‘next in line’.   The official’s relative who was on board  the vehicle was killed a few days later by unidentified assailants who were  linked to the Ampatuans.    The vehicle was passing along Datu Piang-Shariff Agua, where the explosion  happened. The Nov.  23 Maguindanao massacre had similarly claimed the lives of  innocent civilians who happened to be passing the Shariff Aguak-Ampatuan  highway in Maguindanao at the time of the bloodbath.  They readily incurred  the ire of the heavily armed men for being at the wrong place at the wrong  time. *This is the first of a two-part series on the Nov.  23 massacre in  Maguindanao province in southern Philippines. 