For the global religious community, the use of nuclear arms is an  overwhelmingly important ethical issue for the human family.  Thus, nothing less  than the immediate abolition of such weapons is needed from the highest levels,  said speakers at the Parliament of the World’s Religions currently underway in  this Australian city. The Parliament, considered the world’s biggest inter-religious gathering,  brings together people of various faiths to tackle issues relating to peace,  diversity and sustainability.  It opened on Dec.  3 and runs until Dec.  9 at the  Melbourne Convention and Exhibition Centre. Its theme, ‘Make a World of Difference: Hearing each other, Healing the  earth’, reflects the urgent need for religious and civil society groups to act on  crucial issues threatening the world’s survival, nuclear arms being one of  them.  Considered the most significant human-made destructive force on the  planet, nuclear devices pose a spiritual as well as existential threat to  humanity, participants said.  'The time for us to act decisively is now,' said Dr Sue Wareham, immediate  past president of the Medical Association for Prevention of War in Australia,  and Australian Board Member of the international campaign to abolish  Nuclear weapons (ICAN). Noting that the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT) will have its five- yearly review in May 2010, Wareham said, 'Progress towards nuclear  disarmament will be critical at this meeting if we are to prevent further  spread of the weapons, which should no longer be seen as status symbols or  legitimate military weapons, but rather they should be seen for what they are —illegal and inhumane instruments of terror. '  ICAN’s goal is the adoption of a Nuclear Weapons Convention, a treaty to  prohibit the development, testing, production, use and threat of use of  nuclear weapons.  'Such a treaty is feasible and necessary,' Wareham said during the session on  ‘The necessity of nuclear disarmament and steps toward its achievement’.  'It  is about reclaiming the right of every person to live free from fear of nuclear  holocaust.  This is a human rights, environmental, economic, health, political  and security issue and above all it is an ethical issue. 'In June, the United Nations Secretary General Ban Ki-Moon stressed that  nuclear disarmament is 'the most urgent political problem' that the world  faces.  In September, the first ever U. N.  Security Council Summit on Nuclear  Non-Proliferation and Disarmament resolved to 'create the conditions for a  world without nuclear weapons in accordance with the goals of the Non- Proliferation Treaty'. Many civil society organisations around the world have galvanised to ensure  that the 2010 NPT review sees real progress.  'We need a massive global uprising against nuclear weapons as was done to  abolish slavery, to save humanity from annihilation,' said Ibrahim Ramey,  director of the Human and Civil Rights Division at Muslim American Society  (MAS) Freedom Foundation in Washington, D. C.  MAS Freedom has adopted the support of global nuclear abolition as one of  the 12 points of its national (United States) legislative agenda for 2008-2012.   'In light of the revelation of the Quran and the need to affirm the most  positive of Muslim social values, we must demand the abolition of nuclear  weapons, and the conversion of massive nuclear (and conventional) military  spending into resources for social uplift and the sustaining of human life,'  Ramey said. In 2008, the United States spent some 52. 4 billion U. S.  dollars for the  maintenance of its nuclear arsenal while more than 37 million Americans live  in poverty and nearly 50 million live without health insurance.   'Relatively new nuclear weapons states like India and Pakistan are both  immersed in great levels of persistent poverty and insecurity while they  devote scarce resources to building dangerous and unsustainable nuclear  arsenals that can never be used without the certainty of inevitable mutual  annihilation,' Ramey pointed out.   Ramey called on the global community to get involved in networks pushing  for nuclear abolition and put pressure on national governments to support  the NPT.  He said Article 6 of the treaty specifically compels the nuclear  weapons signatory states to enter into negotiation for the eventual abolition  of nuclear weapons.  He likewise urged nations to encourage bilateral declarations of 'no first use'  by states parties to global conflicts, especially in the ongoing hostilities and  disagreements between Israel and Iran, and India and Pakistan. In the U. S. , Ramey said, 'We are calling for an executive order by President  Barack Obama to de-alert U. S.  nuclear forces by separating nuclear warheads  from strategic missile delivery systems, thus reducing the danger of an  accidental nuclear launch against potential adversaries. 'He said people of all faiths and non-faith must support organisations like  Soka Gakkai International (SGI) in their efforts to intensify the campaign  against nuclear arms.  In 2007 SGI launched its 'People's Decade for Nuclear  Abolition' initiative to rouse public opinion and help create a global  grassroots network of people dedicated to abolishing nuclear weapons. The Tokyo-based SGI, a Buddhist association with over 12 million members  in 192 countries and one of the world's longstanding advocates of nuclear  disarmament, has intensified its global campaign for the abolition of nuclear  weapons.  The campaign, which began in 1957, has picked up steam  following President Obama's public declaration that the 'United States (the  only country to launch a military strike with nuclear weapons) will take  concrete steps towards a world without nuclear weapons. ' 'While we need states and governments to take responsible action to reduce  the nuclear threat, civil society clearly has an important role to play,' said  Hirotsugu Terasaki, SGI's executive director of the office of peace affairs in  Tokyo.  'In an ultimate sense, nuclear arms are product of and made possible by a  particular form of human egotism—the self-centredness that is ready to  sacrifice others in order to protect our own interests or society.  Unless we  uncover and disarm this aspect of the human heart, a genuine and enduring  solution to this threat of nuclear arms will not be possible,' Terasaki added. At the heart of the SGI’s nuclear abolition efforts is the desire to appeal to  people’s better nature and to restore confidence in the power of dialogue.   Terasaki argued that 'the logic of states and their competing interests would  lead to the conclusion that the possession of such weapons enhances a  state’s security position. ' Yet civil society 'refuted this logic, stressing the  injustice of weapons that harm non-combatants more than soldiers and  continue to do so long after a conflict has officially ended. '  Various religious communities, like SGI, have engaged in an extensive range  of grassroots activities, petition drives, and developed educational tools,  including volumes of nuclear survivors’ testimonies, DVDs and publications  showing what individuals can do to mobilise public opinion for global nuclear  disarmament.  Speaking on 'Nuclear Weapons Abolition: Response and Advocacy by Religious  Communities', Kimiaki Kawai, program director for Peace Affairs at SGI,  expressed belief that 'the initiatives for nuclear abolition should not be  driven by passive, negative emotions such as fear or guilt. ' Instead, they  should become 'a positive endeavour to build a culture of peace motivated by  human conscience and high moral concerns. '    