A poll released today finds that support among the United States public for  President Barack Obama’s troop 'surge' in Afghanistan has risen sharply since  he delivered his speech last week.  But, a plurality of the U. S.  public do not  believe Obama will follow through on his commitment to begin a withdrawal of  U. S.  forces in 18-months. The poll - released today by the Quinnipac University Polling Institute - says  that U. S.  voters’ support for the war in Afghanistan has gone up by nine- percentage points over the past three weeks.  Fifty-seven-percent of poll  respondents say that fighting the war is the right thing to do while 35- percent disagree. Approval of Obama’s handling of the war has also risen considerably since a  Nov.  18 poll - in which 49-percent disapproved of the White House’s  handling of the war and 38-percent approved, with a 45-percent split  approving and disapproving. 'I think the long period of deliberation has worked in the presidents favour,'  Jim Fine, legislative secretary for foreign policy at the Friends Committee on  National Legislation (FCNL), a Quaker lobby group, told IPS.  'Whatever  decision he announced minimised the opposition. 'Last week’s announcement by the White House of a surge of 30,000 troops  has received a lukewarm response from both Republicans and Democrats. Many Democrats have expressed concern that the war might be unwinnable  and that the White House may extend the withdrawal deadline, while some  Republicans have said the withdrawal deadline could be a declaration of  premature defeat. 'I believe the course the president outlined does offer the best path to  stabilise Afghanistan and ensure Al Qaeda cannot regain a foothold to plan  new attacks against us,' said U. S.  Ambassador to Afghanistan Karl Eikenberry  today at the House hearings on Afghanistan.  'I can say without equivocation  that I fully support this approach,' he said, putting to rest questions about  two leaked diplomatic cables to the White House in which he expressed  concerns about deploying additional troops to Afghanistan. The U. S.  public approves 58 to 37-percent of the Obama administration’s  decision to deploy 30,000 troops and approve 60 to 32-percent the plan to  begin withdrawing combat forces from Afghanistan in July 2011. In a seemingly contradictory poll result, a 45 to 40-percent margin of  respondents believe that Obama will be unable to meet that deadline. 'The dichotomy between the almost two-to-one support for setting a July  2011 date for beginning a withdrawal of combat troops from Afghanistan and  the doubt that Obama will be able to deliver on that promise reflects a  sceptical public about America’s ability to triumph there,' said Peter Brown,  assistant director of Quinnipac University Polling Institute. But other experts argue that the numbers also suggest a fundamental  misunderstanding of the Obama administration’s commitment to a troop  withdrawal. 'The perception that this is a commitment to wind the war down in 18- months is a misperception,' said Fine.  'The 45-percent who say he’ll miss  that pledge are misperceiving that Obama promised anything substantial.  As  [Secretary of Defence] Robert Gates said yesterday, if they withdraw a handful  of troops they would have met the deadline.  It was clear from Obama’s  speech that this was the flimsiest of commitments. 'When poll respondents were asked how long they would be willing to have  large numbers of U. S.  troops in Afghanistan, 31-percent supported a U. S.   military presence for as long as it takes; one-percent supported a presence of  five to ten years; 14-percent supported a presence two to five years; 22- percent supported a presence for one to two years; and 27-percent  supported a presence for less than one year. 'Public support is going to hinge on the perception of how effective the policy  has been.   [Levels of] casualties will certainly be a factor in public support or  opposition,' said Fine. When asked if the U. S.  involvement in Afghanistan was headed in the same  direction as U. S.  involvement in Vietnam, a majority of 57-percent disagreed  with the characterisation, while 32-percent agreed. Obama’s rollout of his war plan last week and his widely admired rhetorical  skills seem to have boosted the public support for the war. 'History teaches that the bully pulpit can be a powerful tool for a president  who knows how to use it, especially when it comes to foreign policy,' said  Brown.  'The American people tend to rally around their presidents in military  matters, at least for a while.  It took some time for similar type speeches  about Vietnam and Iraq by Presidents Lyndon Johnson and George W.  Bush  respectively to lose their ability to rally support. 'While public attitudes in the U. S.  attitudes skew positively towards supporting  Obama’s long awaited plan for troop deployments and withdrawal in  Afghanistan, 66-percent of respondents think Obama doesn’t deserve the  Nobel Peace Prize and only 26-percent think he deserves the prize. Forty-one-percent of respondents say the Nobel committee’s choice to  award Obama the prize makes them think less of the prize. Even a relatively low number of Democrats - 49-percent - thought Obama  deserved the award. Indeed many have commented on the contradictory situation facing Obama as  he accepts the Nobel Peace prize, having just launched a major deployment  of U. S.  combat forces in Afghanistan. 'I think it’s a very awkward position to be in.  There were some who  counselled that he should reject it.  But that is without precedent and  problematic as well,' said Fine.  'It would be hard to imagine worse  circumstances to go to accept a Nobel Peace Prize. '