Advocates for greater freedom of information are expressing approval of the  Obama administration’s new ‘Open Government Directive’ - but some are  sounding cautionary notes that executive agencies are still hiding behind  'national security' to conceal government misconduct. The White House Office of Management and Budget (OMB) issued its ‘Open  Government Directive’ Tuesday, instructing government agencies and  departments to take specific actions to increase 'transparency, participation  and collaboration' in government, with the aim of creating 'an  unprecedented and sustained level of openness and accountability in every  agency. 'The directive is intended to make good on the pledge of transparency  President Barack Obama made during his first week in office.  It establishes  deadlines for action and imposes guidelines for publishing government  information and improving the quality of that information.  It also orders each  agency to establish an ‘Open Government Plan’ that details how it will  incorporate transparency, opportunities for public participation, and inter- agency collaboration into its core mission objectives. The directive does not apply to classified security information and makes an  exception for 'information whose release would threaten national security. 'It is this latter condition that concerns civil libertarians.  Jameel Jaffer, Director  of the National Security Project for the American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU),  said, 'We remain concerned that executive agencies are invoking national  security concerns as a pretext to suppress records that relate to government  misconduct. 'The ACLU is particularly concerned about, 'the Defence Department’s refusal  to release photos relating to the abuse of prisoners, the CIA’s refusal to  release information about black sites overseas and the Justice Department's  refusal to release the legal memos that supplied the basis for the Bush  administration's warrantless wiretapping programme,' Jaffer said.  'While we  appreciate the steps that the Obama administration has taken to increase  government transparency, the administration’s stated commitment to  transparency has not yet translated into real change on information relating to  national security policy. 'While President Obama has talked about instituting 'a new era of  transparency' since his first days in office, in many instances his Department  of Justice has followed precedents set by Obama’s predecessor, George W.   Bush.  These have included invoking the 'state secrets privilege' as a way of  stopping court cases brought by people who claim to have been injured by  U. S.  Government actions.  The injuries range from 'Middle Eastern-looking'  men being rounded up and imprisoned in the days following the terrorist  attacks of Sep.  11, 2001, to charges from others that they were victims of the  'extraordinary rendition' programme run by the Central Intelligence Agency  (CIA). Extraordinary rendition refers to a programme in which people are kidnapped  by the CIA in countries overseas and then sent to third countries where they  are imprisoned, usually denied access to lawyers or to the International  Committee of the Red Cross, and tortured by their jailers. Despite these flaws, the ACLU’s Jaffer said he welcomed the release of the  ‘Open Government Directive,’ 'particularly because it sets out specific,  concrete steps that agencies must take in order to fulfil the Obama  administration’s stated goal of increased government transparency.  As the  directive itself makes clear, the principles of transparency, participation and  collaboration are fundamental to our democracy. 'The directive is comprised of four main components centred on four themes  - publishing information; creating a culture of openness; improving data  quality; and updating policies to allow for greater openness.  Each section  tasks agencies and other key offices with specific goals, complete with  deadlines. A major new requirement in the directive is for each agency to develop  specialised ‘Open Government Plans’ within the next 120 days.  These plans  must detail exactly how each agency will improve transparency and integrate  public participation and collaboration into its activities.  An attachment to the  directive lays out the required components of the plan. Agencies will also be required to establish an ‘Open Government’ webpage on  their sites and permit public participation on the development of the plans,  as well as gather input on transparency issues on an ongoing basis.  The White  House website will also establish an ‘Open Government Dashboard’ to track  agency plans and performance.  These will be the places to watch to see how  well the next step in government openness proceeds. The plan will also require agencies to make use of modern technology to take  a proactive approach to distributing information.  Today, people are often  forced to file Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) requests and to sue Federal  agencies to compel their compliance.  Federal agencies process thousands of  FOIA requests each year. OMB Watch, one of a group of private not-for-profit advocacy groups that  helped the administration draft it, welcomed the new directive. Gary D.  Bass, the organisation’s executive director, noted that the new  directive marks a new direction for the executive branch.  'The directive’s  presumption of openness - certainly a positive step - reflects a thoughtful  understanding that achieving the goal of transparency requires a cultural shift  in the way government operates,' stated Bass.  'The directive’s scope and  specificity blends both rigorous timelines and agency flexibility that will likely  achieve significant improvements in government openness across agencies,'  Bass added.  'The key will be how the public, the White House, and federal  agencies work together in implementing the directive. 'The content of the directive reflects many of the transparency  recommendations collaboratively developed by the right-to-know community  during a two-year process coordinated by OMB Watch.  Those 70 detailed  recommendations were delivered to the Obama transition team in a report  called ‘Moving Toward a 21st Century Right-to-Know Agenda. ’ Among the  recommendations were requests for creating incentives for openness, inter- agency coordination, and publication of high-priority data that is currently  unavailable - all of which are addressed in the new directive. OMB Watch says that the task before government now is to implement the  new policy prescriptions. 