Zimbabwe’s ruling political party has been accused of launching a 'widespread  and systematic campaign of rape and sexual terror' aimed at intimidating  opponents and voters in the troubled African nation, according to a new report  released here. 'The exceptionally violent rapes, as described by women from every province  of Zimbabwe, were often nearly fatal,' says the study released by AIDS-Free  World, an international advocacy organisation that promotes effective global  responses to HIV/AIDS. The heavily documented 65-page report, titled ‘Electing to Rape: Sexual  Terror in Mugabe’s Zimbabwe,’ blasts the country’s beleaguered president,  Robert Mugabe, for turning a blind eye to the sexual atrocities perpetrated  under his political watch. 'Robert Mugabe is among the world’s diabolical masterminds of sexual  terror,' the study declares.  'He understands gender; he understands rape.  He  understands impunity.  It is time he understood justice. 'Asked why the international community has failed to hold Mugabe  accountable for the alleged atrocities, Stephen Lewis, co-director of AIDS- Free World, told IPS it is due in large measure to the failure of the15-member  Southern African Development Community (SADC) or the 52-nation African  Union (AU) to hold the Zimbabwe president accountable. The United Nations, writ large, is reluctant to take any action against a  member of a regional group, if the region itself is passive or stalemated, he  said. If, for example, [South African President Jacob] Zuma were to lead a regional  or sub-regional condemnation of Mugabe, everything would turn around  internationally, said Lewis, a former Permanent Representative of Canada to  the United Nations.  'That’s why we direct our attention so strongly to sub- regional solutions, and emphasise the need and the possibility for South  Africa to act. 'Lewis said the evidence for crimes against humanity, rooted in rape, are  atrocities that cannot go unanswered. 'Our report simply adds to the momentum to increase the pressure on  Mugabe.  But the report is just the first step,' said Lewis, also a former deputy  executive director of the U. N.  children’s agency UNICEF. In collaboration with activist groups on the ground, lawyers and others, 'we  intend to exhaust every possible avenue to get the perpetrators before the  courts and end the culture of impunity,' he added. In the weeks immediately after the June 2008 presidential elections, AIDS- Free World says it received an urgent call from a Harare-based organisation  which was 'overwhelmed' with reports from women associated with the  opposition Movement for Democratic Change (MDC) who had been raped by  members of the ruling Zimbabwe African National Union - Patriotic Front  (ZANU-PF). Responding to the call, AIDS-Free World undertook a series of investigative  trips to the regions with teams of lawyers to interview survivors of the  violence. 'What emerged from the testimony was a brutal, orchestrated campaign of  rape and torture perpetrated by Mugabe’s ZANU-PF youth militia, agents of  Zimbabwe’s Central Intelligence Organisation (CIO), and people who identify  themselves as veterans of the liberation war [affiliated with the ruling party]. 'Survivors’ terror was prolonged by fears that their attackers were among the  15 percent of adults infected with HIV in Zimbabwe, the report added. The study also points out that the next elections in Zimbabwe are just around  the corner, and ZANU-PF 'is already gearing up for its next campaign of  sexual terror. 'Urging Mugabe and his henchmen be brought to justice, the report says that  continued impunity will be a green light for the next rape campaign, and 'the  women of Zimbabwe, and the southern African region, will pay the price. 'Since 1998, the international community has agreed that rape, when  committed as part of a widespread or systematic attack against a civilian  population, can be prosecuted as a crime against humanity. 'But that charge has rarely been made,' the report adds, primarily because  most leaders and societies have not taken the time to understand rape.  And  so, they erroneously placed it along a continuum that begins with normal  sexual arousal. The report says that few recognise rape as a separate, violent act of terror  and control, as unrelated to consensual sex as force-feeding poison is to  sharing a meal. At the United Nations, China and Russia, two veto-wielding permanent  members of the Security Council, have thrown a protective arm around  Zimbabwe, primarily for political, economic and military reasons. The other three members with vetoes are: the United States, France and  Britain - together comprising the permanent five (P5). A July 2008 Security Council resolution, inspired by Western nations and  aimed at imposing sanctions against Mugabe, suffered a rare double veto:  from China and Russia. The resolution, which generated support from nine out of 15 countries in the  Council, also called for an arms embargo on Zimbabwe, a travel ban, and a  financial freeze against Mugabe. Although the resolution had a majority of votes in favour, it failed to pass  muster because of the two vetoes. Asked about the impotency of the United Nations, Lewis told IPS that the  situation with the U. N. , and particularly with the P5, is admittedly difficult. 'But the U. N.  is boxing itself into a corner,' he added, pointing out that one  cannot 'continue to pass resolution after resolution condemning sexual  violence against women in the strongest terms and allow Zimbabwe to  happen without so much as a peep. 'It is the surest way to cause much of the world to lose confidence in the  United Nations, he complained.  And then on top of it, said Lewis, additional  U. N.  special envoys are appointed to deal with sexual violence. 'So how is Zimbabwe suddenly exempt from censure or sanctions? And as if  that weren’t enough, Secretary General [Ban Ki-moon] makes sonorous  speech after sonorous speech about sexual violence, all the while observing  the inactivity and paralysis all around him. 'At some point, the secretary-general has to put himself on the line: how do  you continue presiding over the United Nations when a fundamental tenet of  its charter lies in tatters? Lewis asked.  'And that tenet involves 52 percent of  the world’s population. ' 'The time has come for the Secretary General to read the riot act to China and  Russia, and stop the pretence of a serious response where none exists,' Lewis  added. 'We must bring an end to the madness of rape,' he stressed.  'It should be the  topmost rung on the ladder of U. N.  priorities. '