Suicides among United States military veterans ballooned by 26 percent from 2005 to 2007, according to new statistics released by the Veterans Affairs (VA) department. 'Of the more than 30,000 suicides in this country each year, fully 20 percent of them are acts by veterans,'' said VA Secretary Eric Shinseki at a VA-sponsored suicide prevention conference on Monday.  'That means on average 18 veterans commit suicide each day.  Five of those veterans are under our care at VA. 'The spike in the suicide rate can most clearly be attributed to the ongoing wars in Iraq and Afghanistan and the high number of veterans returning to the U. S.  with post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD). ''We have now nearly two million vets of Iraq and Afghanistan and we still haven't seen the type of mobilisation of resources necessary to handle an epidemic of veteran suicides,'' Aaron Glantz, an editor at New America Media editor and author of 'The War Comes Home', told IPS. ''With [President Barack] Obama surging in Afghanistan coupled with his unwillingness to withdraw speedily from Iraq, it means we have more veterans who have served more and more tours and as a result we have an escalating number of people coming home with PTSD, depression and other mental health issues,'' Glantz continued. Health officials have pointed to the multiple tours of duty served by many U. S.  soldiers deployed to Afghanistan and Iraq as one of the stresses placed on military personnel that differs from previous wars fought by the U. S. 'The unfortunate truth is that the real challenge begins when these service men and women return home and readjust to day-to-day life,' said Rep.  Michael McMahon, co-founder of the Congressional Invisible Wounds Caucus. 'The Department of Defense and the Department of Veterans Affairs must be prepared with the appropriate staff and funding to conduct post-deployment psychological screenings with a mental health professional for all service men and women,' he said.  'Evidently, the paper questionnaires currently in use simply do not suffice.  How many more young men and women must die before we provide the necessary mental health care?'The VA estimated that in 2005, the suicide rate per 100,000 veterans among men ages 18-29 was 44. 99, but jumped to 56. 77 in 2007.  A Rand Corporation report last year found that as many as 20 percent of Iraq and Afghanistan veterans exhibited symptoms of PTSD or depression. ''As I've often asked, mostly of myself, but also of others from time to time, why do we know so much about suicides but so little about how to prevent them?' said Shinseki. The VA came under attack by veterans' groups in April 2008, when internal emails sent by the VA's head of mental health, Dr.  Ira Katz, showed that the VA was attempting to conceal the number of suicides committed by veterans. Under the Obama administration, the approach to handling the increasing number of suicides appears to have shifted, with a greater focus on transparency - the VA is holding a three-day conference on suicide this week.  Last year, Obama announced a 25-billion-dollar increase in the VA's budget over the next five years. While the emphasis on greater transparency, particularly with regards to PTSD and mental health issues, and increased funding for the VA has been welcomed, many are still concerned that the troop surge in Afghanistan and the ongoing U. S.  role in Iraq will put ever greater strains on the VA and its ability to deal with soldiers returning from multiple tours of duty. ''The first Gulf War was over in a matter of months.  This war has gone on for nine years in Afghanistan and seven years in Iraq.  There are two million vets, most of whom have served multiple tours,'' said Glantz. ''What this means is that the military has never faced the stress it faces now.  Not even in Vietnam where we had a draft and most soldiers only served one tour.  In Iraq and Afghanistan everyone's on the frontlines all the time.  Even being in a vehicle going from one military base to another is extremely dangerous,' he said. Shinseki cited the fact that of the 18 veterans who commit suicide each day, five are under the care of the VA, as evidence that both the VA's efforts to prevent suicides are falling short and that the VA is failing to bring enough veterans under its care. Suicides among active duty personnel have also risen, with 147 reported suicides in the Army from January through November 2009 - an increase from 127 in the same period of 2008. Among non-active duty reserve soldiers, 50 suicides were reported in 2008 but the number had risen to 71 during the first 11 months of 2009. Suicide rates in all four services of the military are significantly higher than in the general population, with 52 Marines, 48 sailors, and 41 members of the Air force committing suicide in 2009.  The final figures for suicides in the Army during 2009 will be released Thursday. 