Now that the electorate has given its verdict, Sri Lankan President Mahinda  Rajapakse’s victory in the just concluded presidential polls sends an ominous  signal to the minority people of the island state. After all, the minority populations voted mostly for Rakapakse’s challenger —  former Army commander Sarath Fonseka — in hopes that a victory for the  latter would mean the fulfillment of their aspiration for equal recognition in a  country that has seen deep divisions between ethic groups. Such aspiration seems all but gone. Following Monday’s most crucial presidential contest in postwar Sri Lanka,  Rajapakse, who ran for his second term in office, garnered 57 percent of the  registered votes nationwide. The opposition contender, former Army commander Sarath Fonseka, received  40. 15 percent of the votes.  He was supported by a coalition of the major  United National Party and smaller Tamil and Muslim parties and the Sinhala  extremist party, Janatha Vimukthi Party. Fonseka led the army to a crucial victory against the Liberation Tigers of  Tamil Eelam (LTT) rebel group during the last phase of the war that spanned  a quarter of a decade.  President Rajapakse, as commander in chief of the  armed forces, also claimed victory over the secessionist Tamil Tigers.  He and  Fonseka soon parted ways and competed for the spoils of war — a presidential  post and its sweeping powers — in the 2010 election. Now that a clear presidential winner has emerged in the person of Rajapakse,  who fought on a platform of ending a long, drawn-out civil war and bringing  the country under the slogan of ‘national unity’, analysts say, it is time to  look beyond the populist rhetoric and face reality.  'The rhetoric of a unified country under the Sinhala Buddhist flag has always  swung Sri Lanka’s elections in favour of the Sinhala politicians.  But the  minorities have voted very differently,' explained R.  Bharathi, editor of ‘Sudar  Oli’, a leading Tamil daily.   'There is absolutely no doubt that Rajapakse’s  slogan has been rejected by the minorities, the Muslims and Tamils. 'Indeed, results announced Tuesday on television showed a marked difference  in voting figures in areas dominated by the Sinhala majority population and  Tamil and Muslim minorities. A stark example is the polling results in the war-torn northern towns and  villages.  A breakdown of figures shows that Rajapakse garnered only 3,554  votes in Nallur, a prominent town in Jaffna province, the cultural homeland of  Sri Lanka’s Tamil population.  There was overwhelming support for the  opposition candidate, who received 11,543 votes, or more than three times  the former’s. In Kalmunai, an east coastal town and predominantly Muslim, votes cast for  Fonseka totaled 32,946 compared to 9,564 for Rajapakse, another  illustration of minority frustration over Rajapakse’s national unity pledge.  As a multi-ethnic country, Sri Lanka’s majority Sinhalese group accounts for  75 percent of its 21 million population.  Tamils, traditionally dominant in the  northern and east provinces, comprise 13 percent, and Muslims 9 percent of  the population.  Smaller groups such as the Malays and Burghers are linked to  Western colonial nations. Interviews by IPS with Tamil voters this week conveyed their deep desire for a  leader who respects their rights as equal citizens with the majority race when  it comes to access to jobs, land and education and security for themselves  and their families. These aspirations, they said, have been systematically ignored by Rajapakse,  who has continued to backtrack on important Constitutional guarantees such  as that which involves the 17th Amendment, which promises an independent  public service, judicial and police and election commission.  Shanthini, who declined to giver her last name, heads a women’s support  group in Trincomalee town on the east coast.  She says she voted for Fonseka  because 'I believe Rajapakse will never give the minorities their rights. 'Trincomalee is historically a Tamil-dominated district, but long decades of  state colonisation and migration programmes have seen the area acquire a  growing Sinhala population. Shanthini manages a home for orphaned children in Muttur, a farming town  in Trincomaleee dominated by Tamil and Muslim residents, and which was  the centre of intense fighting between the Sri Lanka Army and the LTTE.   Fonseka won more than 70 percent of cast votes in the town. Professor Jayadeva Uyangoda, political science faculty at Colombo University,  saw irony in the voting pattern among the Tamil and Muslim population, who  favored a military leader who led the ethnic war.  That their favored candidate  did not win could be a disturbing sign of the kind of future awaiting the  minorities under the leadership of Rajapakse. 'Rajapakse’s victory is a deep blow to the minorities, for their hope for  change has been rejected.  For them, the future is clear.  They will be second- class citizens from now on,' he said. Tamil's political leadership became rudderless after the demise of the militant  LTTE.  Politicians belonging to the Tamil National Alliance, the leading Tamil  party, have just begun returning to Sri Lanka from other countries and have  failed to exert a postwar leadership that is expected to help retain the Tamil  identity, which traditionally rode proud in the north and most of eastern Sri  Lanka. Deepika Udugama, a respected human rights expert and professor at  Colombo University, noted how national apathy and populism have taken  over the electorate after the decades-old war. 'The lack of political maturity in Sri Lanka is obvious.  The voter cannot go  beyond the rhetoric of the politicians.  As long as the economic needs of the  individual are looked after, there is no attempt by the voters to insist on  addressing minority grievances, which is what should have been seen in this  election by voting for a change,' she explained. She expects the newly invigorated Rajapakse regime to continue with its  'paternalistic policy' toward the minorities.  Rajapakse, in his war victory  speech in May, insisted there would be no minorities but only a united  country — which the minority populace took as a disparaging allusion to their  aspirations for securing historical homelands that protect their identity.  Sinhala strongholds such as the southern coastal towns like Galle and  Hambantota showed strong support for Rajapakse.  Voters laud his leadership  to end the ethnic war, promoting Sri Lanka as a Sinhala Buddhist country, and  foreign policy that supports China and Iran and veers away from Western  influence. 'Minorities have a right to live as citizens in this country but under a united  country,' insisted Shivanthini de Silva, from Colombo, who voted for  Rajapakse. De Silva echoes the national mood.  And this is exactly what minority groups  in Sri Lanka view with a sense of hopelessness.  Just what the future holds for  their collective identity and aspirations remains in limbo. 