Thailand’s attempt to repatriate over 3,000 ethnic Karens who fled the conflict  in military-ruled Burma last year has triggered strong local and international  objections, including from 27 members of the United States Congress. 'We urgently request that you halt the repatriation of refugees back to  Burma’s conflict zone and continue to offer them protection in Thailand,'  stated the Feb.  4 letter by the bi-partisan group of U. S.  legislators to Thai  Prime Minister Abhisit Vejjajiva. 'If forced to return, these refugees will suffer horrific human rights abuses,'  added the letter, whose signatories included Rep.  Howard Berman, chairman  of the committee on foreign affairs.  'They will undoubtedly be subject to  forced labour, executions, torture and mutilations, forced recruitment as  soldiers, and theft and extortion, making their survival very difficult. 'By Friday afternoon, Bangkok appeared to have caved in to some of this  pressure, including the cries of concern from the Bangkok-based Lawyers’  Council of Thailand and the Karen Women Organisation (KWO). 'Because of concerns raised, we have decided to temporarily halt the process,'  Thani Thongphakdi, deputy spokesman of the Thai foreign ministry, told IPS.   'We have asked those who want to return to do so voluntarily, and today 12  Karens from three families went back. 'However, Bangkok views the ground realities in the Karen areas of Burma, or  Myanmar, as it is officially known, differently from how the U. S.  legislators  and the KWO do.  'Since the fighting on the other side of the border has  stopped, we felt it is safe for them to return,' Thani revealed. The temporary suspension of the Karen repatriation has done little to ease  their anxiety, said Blooming Night Zan, joint secretary of the KWO, which is  based in the north-eastern Thai town of Mae Hong Son.  'The people are  really scared.  They fear they will be sent back soon. 'Part of such fear of return stems from the treacherous route the refugees will  have to walk through once they enter Burma.  'The fighting may be over, but  there are a lot of landmines,' Zan said during an IPS interview.  'Five people  from the area have been injured by landmine explosions in recent months.   One of them was a pregnant woman, (who was injured) in January this year. 'The flight of the Karen refugees from eastern Burma in June last year followed  a round of fighting between Burmese troops and the Karen National Union, a  rebel group that has been waging a separatist struggle for six decades. The over 3,000 refugees who entered Thailand in 2009 added to the  estimated 120,000 refugees, most of them Karen, who had been living in  camps on the Thai side of the border for over two decades. The ongoing conflicts in Burma is also behind the estimated 540,000  internally displaced people who have sought refuge in forests and mountains  after fleeing attacks, including the burning of villages, by the Burmese army. Little of this, however, appears to concern Thailand’s powerful International  Security Operations Command (ISOC), a Cold War relic that was resurrected  with new powers by Bangkok’s last junta, which came to power following a  September 2006 coup and ruled till January 2008. Among the powers of ISOC is to determine the country’s border policies with  its four neighbours — Burma, Cambodia, Laos and Malaysia.  Permission for  refugees from neighbouring countries to remain in Thailand or not is one of  the powers of this institution, where the country’s powerful army chief hold  sway. 'Thailand’s border policy has been placed in the hands of the military  through ISOC,' said Sunai Phasuk, the Thai researcher of Human Rights Watch  (HRW), the New York-based global rights lobby.  'The military’s interpretation  of refugee policy is very narrow and not in compliance with international law  and humanitarian standards. 'The military will open the country’s borders if people are fleeing conflict,'  Sunai confirmed in an IPS interview.  'But they don’t care if people are fleeing  human rights violations, political persecution, religion persecution and  oppression. 'Such increasing militarisation of Thailand’s border policy was brought into  relief in late December last year, when some 4,300 ethnic Hmong who had  fled conflict in Laos were deported in a military-style operation. That deportation, which also provoked howls of protest from the international  community, did not trigger a policy rethink by the one-year-old Abhisit  administration, which came to power as a result of political deals shaped by  the Thai military rather than through a popular mandate. Bangkok dismissed criticism of being cold towards refugees by reminding the  world of its impressive record of hospitality since the 1970s, when tens of  thousands of refugees from the U. S.  war in Indo-China fled to Thailand for  safety.  The South-east Asian country has, in fact, been home to some 1. 5  million refugees over nearly four decades. But until the powerful ISOC was resurrected, refugee policy was shaped by  the prime minister’s office, the foreign ministry, the military and the national  security council.  'It was a delicate balance between these four that ensured a  sense of checks and balances on refugee policy,' a highly placed Thai source  said on condition of anonymity. The first signs of a more military twist to refugee policy under ISOC emerged  with Thailand’s treatment of the Rohingyas, a Muslim ethnic minority fleeing  persecution in western Burma.  'It started after the coup when the military  started to define the Rohingyas as a national security threat,' the Thai source  added.  'They were linked to the insurgency in southern Thailand because the  insurgents happen to be Muslims. 'ISOC’s attitude towards the Rohingya refugees gave the Abhisit  administration its first black eye soon after it came into office.  The military  was exposed in the international media of forcing back to sea boatloads of  Rohingya refugees. 'ISOC has two clear policies about the Rohingya refugees,' said Sunai of HRW.   'They should be intercepted before entering Thai territorial waters, but if they  do, they should be arrested and detained. ' 