Sri Lankans witnessed one of the country’s most contentious elections ever when  President Mahinda Rajapaksa staved off the challenge posed by his former Army  commander, Sarath Fonseka, and clinched more than 1. 8 million majority votes  during the Jan.  26 poll. Both presidential contenders gained popularity after the Sri Lankan military  successfully wiped out the separatist Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE)  last May, ending a civil war that spanned more than two decades and cost  over 70,000 lives.  Rajapaksa’s new term, set to begin this November, will be full of challenges,  as the charismatic leader tries to grapple with the economy and fast-track  development.  He also promised to develop the war-ravaged north and open  a dialogue with minority Tamil political parties, promising to seek a political  solution to their long-running grievances.  Since his re-election, Rajapaksa has maintained a reconciliatory tone despite  the overwhelming majority of the Tamil votes going in favour of his rival  Fonseka.  'I am the president of those who voted for me and those who did  not,' he said at the Election Commissioner’s Department a day after the  election, or within minutes of the announcement of the highly anticipated  results.  The road head, however, will not be easy.  Rajapaksa will have to take some  tough decision that will not please his nationalist Sinhala voter base if he is to  come up with a viable solution to the Tamil problem, a leading academic told  IPS.  'He will have to bring in the Tamil minority into a position of political power.   To do that he will have to take decisions that could be interpreted as  concessions,' Terrence Purasinghe, a lecturer at the Sri Jayawardenapura  University, told IPS.  Purasinghe believes that Rajapaksa has the best chance to take such bold  moves.  'He is in his second term,' he said, adding that the Constitution  forbids him from seeking another term.  Being 'very popular,' he is in the best  position to make such decisions and not worry too much about the political  fallout. '  Other observers feel that the newly re-elected president’s decisive victory  also strengthens his hand even more.  'Rajapaksa’s decisive re-election as  president of Sri Lanka gives him an opportunity to move the country forward  on multiple fronts: political reform, economic renewal, and reengagement  with international players,' the Washington-based Centre for Strategic and  International Studies said in a paper on the Sri Lankan election written by  Uttara Dukkipati, research assistant with the Center’s South Asia Program. Rajapaksa has indicated that he is not shifting attention from the minority  issues.  'It is necessary that we give equal priority to the tasks of national  reconciliation and the building of trust among all sections of our people, as  well as to development that will take us to our rightful place in the  community of nations,' he said in his message on the commemoration of the  country’s 62nd independence on Feb.  4, his first to the nation since his re- election.  Tamil political parties who backed Rajapaksa during the election think he is  their best bet.  'If he was not elected, all the development plans, some already  implemented, would have been disrupted.  He understands the issues facing  the Tamils and he will deal with them,' said Vinayagamurthi Muralitharan  alias Karuna, a former Tiger eastern military commander who broke ranks  with the LTTE command in 2004.  He is now the Minister of National  Integration in the Rajapaksa administration.  Rajapaksa, however, could not gain the support of the largest Tamil party  represented in parliament, the Tamil National Alliance (TNA).  The alliance did  hold several discussions with the president before the election and before  coming forth with a decision to support Fonseka instead.  'The current government has not shown any interest in solving the issues of  the Tamils.  The President did not give satisfactory responses (during the  discussions),' TNA member of parliament Mavi Senathiraja said.  Post-election  the TNA indicated that it was willing to reopen talks with the President.  Rajapaksa also said that he was willing to consider giving more political  powers to the Tamil minority.  'I am certain that the people in the north and  east could stand on their own feet through a solution wrought by devolving  powers to the villages and empowering them in the entire country,' he said in  his speech on Independence Day. But only time will tell how far he is willing to go in devolving power from the  centre.  For the tens of thousands of Tamil minorities who fled the fighting between  government troops and the LTTE, the more pressing need is getting back to  normal life than being granted more political power.  As the fighting wound down in May 2009, over 280,000 civilians fled areas in  northern Sri Lanka known as the Vanni, which were held by the Tigers.  Of  these, more than 150,000 have returned to their home villages while a little  above 105,000 still remain at welfare camps.  For those who have returned to their homes like Angela Croos from the  village of Arippu in southern Vanni, the immediate need is development.   'What we need is permanent peace.  We do have peace in the country, but we  are still struggling to get back on our feet once again,' she told IPS.  'We have problems when it comes to basic facilities such as toilets, transport  and medicine.  The nearest hospital is around six miles away.  We have to cross  a river.  The road is not in good condition.  We hope that these problems will  be addressed now that the election is over. ' Rajapaksa allayed these concerns when he declared national development and  the economy were also high on his agenda. 'Our country, which fell back in progress because of the war, needs to be  advanced swiftly.  Peace alone is not enough,' Rajapaksa declared in his  Independence Day address.  'One country, one people, one law.  That is our  way, the only way. '  Said Croos: 'We can only believe and hope that things will be better now; we  have been through hell. ' 