Sudan's National Electoral Commission says problems are limited to a few constituencies.  But election monitors have observed irregularities across the country. The African Centre for Justice and Peace Studies (ACJPS) reports numerous violations of electoral procedure.  These include late, misprinted or insufficient ballot papers, candidates appearing on the ballot in more than one constitutency; voters being unable to find their names on lists and election observers in at least one case being denied entry to voting centres. ACJPS is a non-profit organisation that monitors human rights violations in Sudan, and works both nationally and internationally towards legal reforms to address them. The Centre's executive director, Osman Hummaida, argues the problems are so serious and widespread that the elections cannot be considered free and fair.  He says that a truly independent electoral commission is needed to review electoral irregularities and plot a way forward. Excerpts of the interview follow. Q: What does it mean that the elections are going ahead despite the flaws in the process?  A: It proves that the National Election Commission (NEC) is not completely independent of the National Congress Party (NCP). If all political parties, including civil society, are calling for the postponement of these elections in order to creative a more conducive environment where free and fair elections can take place, and they don’t want to listen to anyone - it mean means that they are determined to support the ruling party. The technical irregularities are just massive; the level of corruption and rigging that has been reported throughout the first two days is unbelievable.  Even if we want to ignore some of these other irregularities, the technical and logistical irregularities alone are enough to have these election postponed as they are far from being free and fair.  Q: How widespread are these irregularities?   A: It's happening throughout the country, it's massive.  There is no part of the country or constituency that has not been affected or where party symbols have not omitted altogether or completely mixed up. Due to this, many party candidates from among the few still in the race have withdrawn from the elections. Q: Will the extension of the voting dates from three to five, help to rectify some of these problems?  A: I think the problems are now beyond being rectified. People have already voted for parties and candidates using wrong symbols.  There is no way that that could be rectified.  There are other technical problems related to registration and access to voting centres including earlier problems involving political candidates’ rights to campaign. These are serious issues which need serious consideration.  And without setting up an independent commission to look into these numerous problems, I think this exercise is just a waste of resources Sudanese people. Q: The Ummah Party, the strongest political party in the west of the country, is boycotting the election.  Who will Darfuris be voting for?  A: I don’t think the Darfuris are really taking part in these elections; the turnout has been very low.  Even in big towns and cities where people have participated, symbols have been changed and activists and observers have been removed (from polling centres). In western Darfur there are reports of cars without number plates transporting ballot boxes without being accompanied by observers or any election officials, and the explanation for that is has been, 'it’s a mistake that they’ve been moved out of there'. So this gives an impression that they are not serious about this election when it comes to Darfur as well. Q: The South’s champions, the SPLM, have also boycotted the election.  Does this indicate that their focus is on the referendum next year?  A: That is general perception, that they will allow the elections to continue, in keeping with the implementation of the Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA) schedule, which would mean that the referendum should take place in January next year.  Because the National Congress Party has threatened to delay the referendum if the elections are postponed. However it is my belief that if we allow the NCP to rig the national election, they could well do the same with the referendum.  The referendum would not represent the real will of the people of the South.  If they manage to manipulate the will of all Sudanese people during the election now, nothing will stop them then. Q: What do you think the outcome of this election will be?  A: I think it will just bring confusion and frustration.  We hope that if there is any violence associated with it, it could be contained.  But for sure it would not bring any favorable outcomes for the future of Sudan or reducing the conflict in Darfur.  Q: Despite all this people are still going to the polls, why?  A: People in remote areas in particular have turned out to participate because they haven’t heard that many of the political candidates have boycotted the elections. In some areas there has been a large turn-out because people don’t have access to media.  Especially since the Sudanese government continues to arrest people distributing information about boycotts in some have areas. 