Two cyclists from the minority Tamil community are shooed away by  government soldiers as they approach this northern Sri Lankan city’s only  Buddhist temple while President Mahinda Rajapaksa is paying a visit. But when a family from the majority Sinhalese family ambles toward the  guards, they are treated more amiably. These twin incidents during Rajapaksa’s rare visit to Jaffna on Apr.  1 illustrate  the contrasting ways in which soldiers from an army made up largely of  Sinhalese treat the majority and minority ethnic groups.  Right through the late 1970s, Tamils claimed discrimination from the  majority community.  In 1977 Tamil parties swept the polls in the northern  capital of Jaffna on the call for a separate homeland.  A few years later, Tamil  militancy emerged and led to almost three decades of civil war. Many fear the government still has a long way to go in winning the hearts  and minds of the Tamil community, which dominates Jaffna. 'There is nothing we can do,' explained a veteran Anglican priest, who  declined to be named, when asked whether the government was bending  backwards to win the support of the Tamils.  Tamils are the largest minority group in Sri Lanka, representing about 13  percent of the country’s total population of 20 million.  Many of them live in  Jaffna, considered the seat of Tamil nationalism and the second most  important city of Sri Lanka, next to Colombo. The end in May 2009 of a bitter conflict in which Tamil rebels sought to carve  out a separate state for their minority community triggered huge business  interest in Jaffna, virtually untouched by the economic liberalisation that Sri  Lanka pursued in 1977.   Nearly a year after the war ended, burnt out, shell-shocked buildings can be  seen lying side by side with spanking new ones for banks or financial services  as Colombo firms rush to grab a share of the new business opportunities in  Jaffna. But youngsters and city elders clamor for a different kind of development.   'We need to be able to own rather than be bystanders (to development),' said  a city businessman, who declined to be identified for fear of reprisal. The government has set up a task force headed by Basil Rajapaksa, brother of  President Mahinda Rajapaksa and Minister for Economic Development, to  oversee development in the north.  Nirmala (not her real name), a high school student, said banks and financial  services are not helpful to the Jaffna Tamils.  'A lot of banks setting up branches here are employing people from Colombo.   We don’t have jobs.  On the other hand, the banks take our deposits, but  getting a loan is difficult because the banks want collateral, which we don’t  have because our properties have been destroyed or have been taken over by  the army for military purposes,' she said. But Central Bank Governor Ajith Nivard Cabraal told IPS that quite a few Jaffna  youngsters were being employed in new bank branches that were being  opened in Jaffna.  Nirmala was one of a group of 30 16- to 17-year-old high school students  who met with IPS recently to discuss their future in an environment where  livelihood and employment opportunities are scant.  They were unanimous in  saying that the people of Jaffna are not part of the development that the  government is carving out for the north. Most of them want to go abroad for studies and live there permanently.   'There is no future here.  We will always be second-class citizens,' said Arul.  Perceptions of widespread insensitivity of the Colombo establishment to the  city residents became more pronounced when a group of businessmen and  bankers flew into the city in late March to lay the foundation stone for a new  80-room hotel being built by a Colombo bank. Few Tamils from Jaffna were invited to the event and all the speeches were  delivered in English even if the majority of the 700,000 people speak only  Tamil.  Furthermore, local residents questioned the location of the hotel as it  is close to a sacred Hindu temple, visited by millions of Tamils every year.  'How can you sell alcohol or meat in a sacred location?' asked Arudpragasam  Sivathamby, a taxi driver.  Outside the same temple premises, dozens of  Sinhala traders are doing business, in some cases displacing the Tamil  merchants, causing resentment among the minority ethnic group.  'This is causing a huge problem,' said Tamil parliamentarian Suresh  Premachandran.  Development is only seen in the form of banks, finance companies and  consumer firms opening up in Jaffna while job-creating industries or  factories are still inexistent.  Some roads are being developed while an old  railway line from the Sinhalese-dominated south is being repaired. Tamils are hoping for a greater role in power sharing.  However, Dr.  S.  I.   Keethaponcalan, a political scientist from the University of Colombo, said that  is not a priority for the government at the moment.  'The government won a  commanding majority at the recent parliamentary polls, and trying to appease  the Tamils is not the biggest priority at the moment,' he declared. 