'I don’t feel any fear.  My parents do.  They instruct me almost every day to stay  away from crowded places,' said Afaq Ali, a Grade 1 student in this capital city  of the militancy-wracked Khyber Pakhtunkhwa province in Pakistan. Undeterred by an explosion at the Police Public School on Apr.  19, he said no  one could stop him from going to school.  'Militants must be ashamed of  targeting children,' Ali said.  The militant attack killed one student and  wounded 10 others.  Not too far from the Police Public School is the University Public School, where  most of the students remain optimistic that the Taliban forces could still be  defeated through education. 'When we get education, we can spread the light and do away with the  widespread ignorance in our society,' declared Kashif Shah, a Grade 3 student  at the said school. In 2001 the Taliban came to the Federally Administered Tribal Area (FATA)  after they were forced to flee Kabul, the capital of Afghanistan, by the U. S. - led forces.  From there they began sneaking into the Khyber Pakhtunkhwa —  which until recently was known as the North-West Frontier Province — and  started targeting schools and commercial establishments such as CD and  music shops. FATA lies between Khyber Pakhtunkhwa and the neighbouring country of  Afghanistan. In Swat district alone — an administrative district in Khyber Pakhtunkhwa — the  Taliban destroyed a total of 188 girls’ schools and 97 boys between 2007 and  March 2009, displacing some 500,000 students. 'Female education is against Islam.  They (women and girls) are required to sit  at home and not venture out,' Swat Taliban spokesman Muslim Khan, now in  jail, told IPS in March 2009, when asked why girls’ schools were a prime  target of his militant group. 'We are not bothered by the blasts.  Our main aim is to get education at any  cost.  Our parents want us to get more education and become doctors,' said  Imran Ali, whose brother Jawad Ali also sustained injuries in the explosion at  the Police Public School early last week just before its closure. In January a suicide attack near a girls’ school at Lower Dir, one of the 24  districts in Khyber Pakhtunkhwa, killed seven people. Jamal Shah, a fifth grader in a government primary school in Lakaro in  Mohmand Agency, recalled a similar incident in his school, which was blown  up by alleged militants on Apr.  14.  'When we woke up, we received the bad news that our school had been  blown up by militants,' he said.  'I went that same day to see my school,' he  said, notwithstanding his parents’ advice not to leave the house. Now 500 students are holding classes amid the rubble of the devastated  school, 'because everyone wants education,' 13-year-old Shah said.  He  expressed fears that he and his schoolmates would end up as laborers if they  were uneducated. His 50-year-old father, Anwar Shah, a mason, said, 'My greatest desire is to  provide better education for my child so he could live his life with ease. ''My only concern is the safety of my three children.  I bring them to [and pick  them up from] school every day,' said Attaulh Khan, unmindful of the two- kilometre bicycle ride to and from the school.    Sardar Hussain Babak, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa education minister, has vowed to  rebuild all the schools that have been destroyed by militants.  'We would  make every effort to educate the students,' he said. Such an undertaking is estimated to cost 220 million U. S.  dollars. During the past week, the Taliban insurgents have destroyed 16 schools in  FATA, Babak said.  'With less than 50 percent literacy rate for males and 37  percent for females, we have been urging the international community to  help us in the rebuilding process,' he added. Police officer Safiullah Khan said authorities have beefed school security as a  result of the spate of school bombings.  'We keep close contact with school  principals to avert any threat to the lives of the children,' he told IPS. He added that school administrators have deployed security guards in their  buildings to keep an eye on suspicious-looking individuals coming in and out  of the schools. Still part of stepped up security measures in schools is sending students  home in batches of two, at an interval of 15 minutes, said Bushra Ali of the  University Model School (UMS).  Otherwise, they tend to rush out of the school  gate, he said.   Pervez Malik, who teaches at the Government Girls Primary School, said that  the school was bombed on Mar.  13 by suspected terrorists.  'The militants’  actions against innocent civilians have only served to deepen the students’  desire for education.     Twelve-year-old Gul Ghutai, a Grade 6 student at UMS who dreams of  becoming a doctor 'so she can serve her countrymen,' said the Taliban have  no right to kill.  'Nobody except God has the authority to take human life,' she  said. 'We aren’t going to be browbeaten by their campaign against education and  knowledge,' said Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Information Minister Mian Iftikhar  Hussain.  'Our religion Islam tells us to seek education at any cost. '