Almost a year on, Dipali Sahu still recalls with horror the day an operation by the  policemen and paramilitary troopers began here in June last year to take back  control of the vast swathes of eastern India captured by the Maoist rebels. 'They broke open the door, barged into our house looking for the rebels, and  rained blows on us.  I was hit in the head.  I started bleeding and crying,'  recalls the fifty-something woman from a village in Pirakata near Lalgarh, a  cluster of villages in West Midnapore district of eastern state West Bengal. Dipali’s husband, Niranjan, looking very frail, was beaten up mercilessly too.   Even their son-in-law was not spared as well. Many were picked up as suspected Maoists and put behind bars for months  as a long, drawn-out trial ensued. 'My brother was lying in a hut by the road.  He was picked up by security  troops for no reason.  He spent months in jail, and after spending nearly  17,000 rupees (about 400 U. S.  dollars) for legal expenses, we secured his  release,' says Sujan Sahu, another villager. Almost a year since the deadly anti-Maoist operation in Lalgarh, inhabited  mainly by tribal people, the scars of the villagers caught between the rebels  and the policemen refuse to heal. As the Maoists periodically launch attacks on police across the country’s  central and eastern regions, the innocent villagers become casualties of a  debilitating war between the authorities and the rebels, believed to be  hovering around 22,000 and living mostly in the forests, with their patrons  tucked away in big cities. While India’s economy has hurtled forward to emerge as the third largest in  Asia and many of the fortunate millions lifted themselves out of poverty,  regions like Lalgarh in West Bengal remain mired in poverty and chaos. Impoverished village folk — in Lalgarh and elsewhere in the south Asian  country — gripe that both the democratically elected communist government,  which has ruled the West Bengal state for 33 years, as well as the various  administrations that have held the reins of power in New Delhi have  neglected them.  Many say this has paved the way for the ultra-left rebels to  set up bases in the rural regions and adjoining forests. The Maoist movement began in the late 1960s in a northern town of West  Bengal state called Naxalbari, from which ‘Naxalites’ or ‘Naxals’, as the  rebels are also known, is derived.  It subsided in the early 1970s only to  resurface as a more violent force that now operates under the Communist  Party of India (Maoist). India’s Prime Minister Manmohan Singh calls Maoists the biggest internal  threat to the country. Lalgarh became a symbol of the growing Maoist expansion in a majority of  the 28 Indian states as they captured the police station and adjoining areas in  early 2009. In June last year, the police regained control of Lalgarh, which is about 170  kilometres west of Kolkata, West Bengal’s capital, as they launched a massive  offensive.  Reports of human rights violations poured in from Lalgarh  following the operation. While the situation in Lalgarh appears to have normalised, its residents still  anguish over their plight.  All development activities have come to a halt and  water scarcity roils the parched villages. 'We don’t have water in the village.  All wells have dried up and no deep tube  well was sunk owing to the situation.  It is a desert,' one villager complains. 'We have lost all business.  I have a fertiliser shop, but there is no buyer now.  I  can only see starvation ahead,' says Gautam Mahish, 35, a small trader.  The list of the villagers’ woes seems endless.  Jitman Gharai and his wife  Kalpana bemoan their penury. 'We live by making brooms.  It is not enough and there is no government  assistance or subsidised food grains.  There is no power in the village, there is  no kerosene,' say the couple, who has yet to receive the much-touted Below  Poverty Level (BPL) cards for India’s poor. Under the Indian government’s BPL scheme, only the very poor belonging to  the vulnerable sections of society are entitled to the ration cards being  distributed by the Food and Supplies Department at subsidised prices. In Lalgarh not a single poor villager appears to posses such a card. 'We have not heard of such a card ever,' says Laxmi Mal, a 35-year-old  resident of Hirakuli village in Lalgarh whose son had to run away from the  troopers when the operation against the Maoists began. 'In West Bengal the tribal people have lost their faith in the communist  government that hardly carried out any developmental work.  The Maoists did  them no good,' says Abhirup Sarkar, an economist with Kolkata’s Indian  Statistical Institute. 'Yet in times of police atrocities or harassment, they are the only forces to  which the villagers can turn perhaps.  Such dependence nourishes the rebels. 'The police forces in Lalgarh, who now live in constant fear of attack, say no  progress is possible in Lalgarh until the political process begins.  'Maoists still rule the region.  All members of political parties have either fled  their houses or are living in fear without any activity.  Till the government  restores the political process here, no progress is possible,' says an official in  Lalgarh’s police station, where a huge iron gate is kept locked round the  clock in anticipation of another attack by the rebels.   Such fear constantly hounds the rest of the villagers too. 