Two months into Thailand’s anti-government protests and as an army-led  blockade is underway to end them, the media are struggling with challenges to  their credibility and perceptions of bias in the South-east Asian country’s  gravest political stalemate in years. Already divided before the protests started on Mar.  12, media have also been  working under a state of emergency that was declared in April and was this  week extended beyond Bangkok and surrounding areas.      Navigating the polarised environment is far from easy, journalists say. 'The biggest challenge journalists are facing now is how to get the truth.  The  second difficulty is how to keep themselves safe,' Nophakhun  Limsamarnphun, front-page editor of the English-language daily ‘The  Nation’, said in an interview. But there is not one truth for all 67 million Thais, and different versions of it  are reflected in the different media, whom many tend to categorise into those  that back the government, those that give space to both government and  anti-government sides, and those that are by the protesters themselves. The red-shirted protesters with the United Front for Democracy against  Dictatorship (UDD) have been demanding that the government of Prime  Minister Abhisit Vejjajiva dissolve Parliament and call for a new election.     They say that Abhisit came to power not through an electoral mandate but  through manoeuvring by the military and after the negation of electoral  mandates won by political parties they voted for.  These parties, like the UDD,  have as their patron fugitive former Prime Minister Thaksin Shinawatra, who  lives in exile and who the government says is financing the protests. Since early April, UDD protesters have occupied the Rajprasong commercial  area and on May 13, the government cut off water, electricity and access to it.   It ordered the blockade after the red shirts refused to end their protest  despite the offer of a November poll by Abhisit, who has since revoked his  offer. Just as the protests have divided society, they have divided the media.  Government media outlets have come under fire for bias, and some state  television announcers have received threats.  Mainstream media have been  faulted for reporting mostly the government’s views, or failing to provide  balance and space for opposing views. In March, a grenade was thrown at the state-owned National Broadcasting  Services of Thailand.  In April, news reports said that red shirts surrounded  Channel 3's broadcasting van and told the staff to leave.  A brick was thrown  through a side window of the van, they added. The Thai Journalists Association (TJA) had said: 'Media workers are not a  contesting party to the UDD protesters.  .  .  .  We urge the leaders and the  protesters to cease any action that is perceived as threatening or intimidating  to the media and instigating violence. 'Independent publications like the ‘Prachatai’ have also gotten into trouble —  and its website site blocked under state of emergency rules. Pana Thongmee-arkom of the National Telecommunications Commission say  impartiality is almost impossible to achieve.  'What matters is that the media  offers balanced information.  So far, the information that mainly come from  the mainstream press is imbalanced and reflects more the views of urban  dwellers and not much of the rural people’s opinions,' he told a May  discussion. Asawin Nedpogaeo, dean of communication arts at Dhurakij Pundit  University, said: 'What's coming out now in terms of news and opinion is  largely influenced by the government because of the strict controls put in  place after the violent clashes that happened in the past weeks. 'After several violent encounters in April, clashes and deaths from snipers’  shots have occurred since May 13.  On Saturday, news reports said at least 42  people had died since the Apr. 10 clash and more than 1,400 injured. But for Pravit Rojanaphruk of ‘The Nation’ newspaper, it is not just about  censorship: 'They (media) have become even more partisan and bloodthirsty  and think a violent ending (to the protests) is acceptable. 'For the red shirts, Asawin explained, 'Not only have they been treated  unfairly by laws, they have also been discredited by mainstream media's  coverage of their protest action. ' 'The red shirts have been voraciously consuming foreign news media,  translating them into Thai, printing them out and distributing them among  the protesters,' Pravit said.  'The media did a very good job of trying to scare the public, not without the  help of the government,' said long-time Thailand resident CJ Hinke, whose  Freedom Against Censorship Thailand website was among the 600 blocked  under the emergency.  Often, many fear 'being judged and saying the wrong things' and this comes  out as self-censorship, including in the media, Hinke added. But Nophakun disagreed: 'It may be true in the past and there is indeed some  truth in the perception that we don’t want to be judged negatively and to  conform with mainstream thought, because we try to be nice and not to hurt  other people.  But this is not the case now as more people are starting to  speak out. 'This, he said, is happening in the UDD protesters’ voicing of problems about  poverty and exclusion.  'I think there is some truth to what protesters have  said.  The problem has existed for years but no one ever addressed it,' said  Nophakun. Thus far, he said, the situation is 'getting better as we are getting more  respect from the protesters and we are now being allowed in the protest  site'.  On Saturday, reports said there were few or no journalists in the  Rajprasong protest site amid fears of a crackdown. 