Burning tyres and buses with plumes of smoke billowing from them.  Sniper  shots and grenade attacks.  Deaths and injuries.  No-go zones in the Thai capital. These are what Bangkok residents have been seeing since the evening of May  13, when the Thai government blockaded the area that anti-government  protesters have occupied since early April in order to pressure them to end  their campaign. The clashes have taken place around the perimeter of the more than four  square-kilometre protest area that soldiers sealed off, after power, water and  mobile phone networks were cut off on Thursday. Though other parts of Bangkok are unaffected, the army has declared a few  areas 'live-fire' zones, where clashes continue.  On Sunday, the government  gave protesters a new deadline to leave the Rajprasong site by Monday. Since Thursday, 29 people have died and at least 221 injured, many of them  civilians, officials said Sunday. 'Perhaps this was really coming, I don’t know,' sighed Lek, an employee.  'But  how did we let it come to this? And how can this continue for long?''The unidentified armed men, including snipers, are most scary for me,'  added Pakorn Lertsatienchai, a researcher at Chulalongkorn University.  'I’m  afraid the situation will turn to anarchy. 'Journalist Sujane Kanparit said he feared more casualties, reaching a point  where the military could intervene, and 'guerrilla warfare' after the  crackdown.  'Thailand has reached a point of no return,' he said. Loud silence hangs over what used to be the bustling financial and shopping  districts of this city of more than six million people, who have been living with  the protests by the red-shirted United Front for Democracy against  Dictatorship (UDD) aimed at having a new election held in this South-east  Asian country. Entry has been barred to the Rajprasong shopping district, which is  barricaded with rubber tyres and sharpened bamboo poles and where officials  say some 6,000 protesters, many from the poorer regions of the Thai north- east but much fewer than the tens of thousands before, remain.  On national television, Prime Minister Abhisit Vejjajiva said Saturday the  lockdown was 'the only way to restore law and order in this country, as we  earlier attempted to use other methods, such as holding negotiations'.  'We cannot retreat because we are doing things that will benefit the entire  country,' he said. Government spokesman Panithan Wattanayagorn said, 'We hope in the next  few days to return to normalcy. ' He spoke in English on television Saturday, a  rare move to address foreign audiences as well. The government hopes that tightening the noose around Rajprasong will  force an end to the protests, which began on Mar.  12 at a different protest  site in old Bangkok. UDD leaders have said they will stay till the end, but asked the government to  stop using force.  'This call is for preventing unarmed red shirts from being  killed or injured,' red-clad leader Natthawut Saikua said, saying talks can  resume if the crackdown stops. But officials said they were asking women, children and the elderly to leave  the protests and take the buses provided to go back to their homes outside  Bangkok.  There have been reports of a split among UDD leaders, saying the more  moderate ones have left because they found acceptable Abhisit’s offer of an  election on Nov.  14 and since the protests were alienating the public.  Some  high-profile leaders, like Veera Musikapong, have not been seen in the  protest site since last week, but others denied a split and said he had a cold. After Abhisit made his poll offer in early May, many expected the protests to  end.  But UDD leaders, whose patron is the fugitive ex-prime minister  Thaksin Shinawatra, have continued with them after seeking accountability by  Abhisit and his deputy for deaths in the Apr.  10 dispersal of protesters. Last week, Abhisit revoked his election offer.  Thus far, opinions on the  blockade seem divided.  A poll Saturday showed that 51. 33 percent of Thais  supported the move to reclaim Rajprasong and a little over 40 percent  disagreed because it had led to deaths. At the start of its protests in March, the UDD demanded a new election,  saying the Abhisit government came to power in 2008 not through an  electoral mandate but by manoeuvring by the military.  This, they said,  occurred after the elite threw out leaders — allies of Thaksin — that they voted  in through elections in recent years. At one point, more than 100,000 people, many from the north and north- east who feel deprived of real representation by the Bangkok-based elite, had  joined the red protests. Confusion remains about the clashes and ‘third forces’ in them.  The  government says some red shirts are armed and Abhisit warns of 'terrorists'  among them, but UDD leaders say protesters do not have guns.  Television footage shows troops’ encounters with red shirts hurling rocks,  slingshots or Molotov cocktails, as well as protesters blocking army trucks  and assaulting soldiers.  Sniper fire and grenade attacks continue but those behind them are unknown.   On Thursday, tensions rose after a sniper shot a renegade general with the  red shirts, Khattiya Sawasdipol, in the head.  Independent website accounts report troops shooting at protesters who take  them on, but the government says soldiers use live fire only in defence.  A  journalist reported seeing some red shirts with handguns. In an atmosphere with few rules, some find a resumption of talks hard to  imagine.  In the same opinion poll, 53. 25 of respondents said they would  continue talking to the red shirts if they were prime minister. 'I don’t think hope for talks is possible,' said Pakorn.  'Apart from Thaksin, I  don’t see anyone who can be the representative for the UDD to hold talks  with the government. 'Added Sujane: 'I have no clue on how and in what way this bloodshed is  going. ' 