If there were any hopes that Wednesday’s surrender by the leaders of Thailand’s  biggest anti-government protests in decades would instantly ease tensions,  these were dashed by the ugly spasms of violence that wracked this capital soon  after they turned themselves in. If anything, the attacks by protesters, who were angered by the end of the  rally and set fire to buildings and shopping malls, confirmed what everybody  knows — that while the protest site of the United Front of Democracy Against  Dictatorship (UDD) has been cleared and its leaders detained, the political  crisis is far from over. The sprawling and glitzy Centralworld mall, beside which thousands of UDD  protesters had camped out for six weeks to demand a new election but never  broke into, was in flames on Wednesday afternoon.  At least 27 buildings and locations were on fire as of 9 p. m.  local time,  including the Thai TV 3 building, the Metropolitan Electricity Authority, Siam  Theatre, several banks and part of the Stock Exchange of Thailand, officials  said.  Prime Minister Abhisit Vejjajiva imposed a curfew from 8 p. m.  to 6 a. m.  to  allow the military, which has been carrying out a blockade against the red- shirted UDD protesters since May 13, to put a stop to the mayhem that had  central parts of the city burning.  On national television, he said, 'We’re  confident and determined that we will solve' the unrest. Earlier, government spokesman Panithan Wattanayagorn said the military  would 'initiate operations throughout the night' and control 'a few pockets of  trouble in several areas of Bangkok. Curfew was declared in 23 provinces, including those around Bangkok and in  the north-east, from whose rural regions the UDD draws a lot of support.  In  a sign of more anger in the anti-government movement, thousands of red  shirts, called such following the UDD’s protest colour, attacked government  and other targets in the north-eastern provinces of Khon Kaen and Udon  Thani and in northern Chiang Mai. 'There are remaining radical elements embedded in the demonstration for  weeks, with war weapons, and they may come out and try to do something  not good to the public, like try to set fire to buildings,' Panithan said, asking  Bangkok residents to stay home. Once again, Panithan spoke in English after making the same announcement  in Thai in order to address the foreign community. But the black smoke hanging heavy over the Bangkok skyline, caused by  arson and burning tyres, matched the feeling among many that this South- east Asian country was moving into uncharted territory. 'I really don’t know what to expect now, I can’t say any more.  I’m not a  fortune teller,' signed the owner of an eatery.  'It will end, but look at that,'  she said, pointing at the television news. 'At least the red leaders have shown responsibility (in the UDD) by  (surrendering),' said Tosporn Patanaviroj, a 29-year-old steward.  'But  without the leaders, a large number of protesters still want to continue their  fight. ''Now it has become a war between people and soldiers, and it could be worse  because people’s call has been neglected,' he added, referring to the UDD  demand for a new election that is now in tatters.  'And especially now, the  angry crowd (is) without effective and strong leadership — I could not imagine  more. 'After the curfew announcement past 4 p. m. , residents rushed to stores to find  others stashing up on food and supplies.  'It’s good that I’m selling my goods  fast so I can go home too,' a male vendor of street food muttered while  packing up his trolley. Early on Wednesday, Bangkok woke up to news that the army had started to  move into the Rajprasong area that the UDD protesters have occupied since  Apr.  3, using armoured personnel carriers to break through barricades from  the Lumpini area. A little past 1 p. m. , UDD leaders went up to the Rajprasong stage and told  thousands of protesters, including women, that it was time to end the rally  due to the high casualties among red shirts in the six days since the army  blockade began. UDD leader Natthawut Saikua was quoted as saying: 'I can no longer tolerate  the cruelty inflicted on us. ' Added another UDD leader, member of  Parliament Jatuporn Promphan: 'I apologise to you all, but I don't want any  more losses.  I am devastated too.  We will surrender. 'Since May 13 when the lockdown of the more than four square- kilometre  Rajprasong rally area began, some 42 people have died and more than 282  injured.  Many casualties have been civilians and protesters. Soldiers and groups of red shirts have been engaged in pitched battles  around the perimeter of the rally site since Thursday last week. Concern has been expressed about the use of heavy weapons against  protesters outside the Rajprasong area, who have been trying to prevent the  army from getting to the protest site.  Photos and footage have showed some  soldiers shooting bullets, as well as some protesters with guns and  homemade firebombs, apart from using slingshots, rocks, and Molotov  cocktails. The last attempt at talks fell through Wednesday after a Senate offer to  mediate between the government and the UDD, whose patron is the fugitive  ex-prime minister Thaksin Shinawatra, was revoked. Soon after the UDD leaders addressed their followers, they turned themselves  in to the authorities along with four others.  Wednesday’s events bring to a violent peak the latest chapter in a crisis that  goes back to 2006, when Thaksin, popular among the poor whose support he  had courted through populist programmes, was ousted in a military coup.  In the next years, Thaksin-allied political parties won national elections but  the UDD says these were negated by the Bangkok political elite when they  found ways to throw elected leaders out of office.   It wanted a new election to  replace the Abhisit government, questioning his legitimacy because they said  the military had manoeuvred parliament in order to make him prime minister  in 2008.  In early May, a resolution seemed near after Abhisit offered a Nov.  14 poll  date.  But differences among UDD leaders, some of whom found the offer  acceptable, led to the continuation of the rally.  By last week too, and under  pressure from citizens tired of the protests, Abhisit had revoked his offer. 'Now I’m scared,' said security guard Ong, on duty at a condominium here on  what is sure to be another restless night.  (With reports from Nattharin  Kitthithaweepan. ) 