The charred skeletons of buildings in central Bangkok will be rebuilt after this  week’s violence, but repairing the gaping fissures in Thai society - deepened  further by the army crackdown on anti-government protesters  - remains a far  harder task. by those frustrated by the end of the protests led by the United Front for  Democracy against Dictatorship (UDD), whose leaders surrendered on May 19  as troops moved into their rally site.    The period between now and the latest time by which the next election  should be held in December next year — voting has been a core issue in this  crisis — bears watching after the mayhem that in the last eight days has led to  52 deaths and 407 injured, going by official figures, and more than 60  arrested.    In the longer term, tough questions arise over how the frayed political  consensus around the parliamentary electoral system — and room for  resolving grievances — can be fixed given the divisions since the 2006 coup  that ousted the fugitive ex-prime minister Thaksin Shinawatra.    Beyond the violence seen in troops clashing with armed UDD supporters  and arson attacks after their leaders’ surrender, protesters’ demands centred  on a new election under the parliamentary system in this country of 67. 8  million people.    Elections are a tool for seeking fresh mandates during crises.  But how  much confidence is now left in them as a way of changing leaders and  pushing change within the system — in the process letting off steam — has yet  to be seen.    'I don’t think you can get back the hearts of these people (rural protesters)  with so many killed like this,' said Chulalongkorn University professor  Puangthong Pawapakan.  'The government can never go to the north and  north-east now. '   Those regions, which include this South-east Asian country’s poorest, are  where the UDD draws much of its backing from, though a mix of city  residents also backed the protests.     The north-easterners’ presence at the rally at Rajprasong commercial  district was clear from the strains of local ‘luk thung’ music, the baskets of  ‘khao niao’ (sticky rice), grilled chicken and ‘som tum’ (papaya salad), and  their accent.   After the violence, 'I don't think it (Democrat Party-led government) can win  an election whenever it will be held,' said a Thai activist who did not want to  be named.    This reflects the disconnect between the rural heartland, home to majority  of the population, and the capital, seat of the political elite.  'There are two  societies in this country, and they have little contact with each other.  They  don’t know each other and they don’t understand each other,' Puangthong  said.    This gulf may well have widened after May 13, when the army moved to  block off the protest site ahead of the final crackdown on May 19.     Pledging to pursue reconciliation, Prime Minister Abhisit Vejjajiva said  Friday: 'We recognise that as we move ahead there are huge challenges ahead  of us, particularly the challenge of overcoming the divisions that have arisen  in this country. '   Meantime, emotions remain high.  'Do you think that your government  would be as tolerant as the Thai government has been?' business owner  Reungvit Nandhabiwat asked foreigners in the English-language ‘Bangkok  Post’ newspaper.     'These protesters from the countryside didn’t know any better, they have no  education,' said one company manager.  In the months since they began their  protests in March, UDD protesters — called red shirts due to their protest  colour — have been disdainfully called ‘red buffaloes’.    But some disagree.  'Dozens of people have died today, and hundreds were  wounded, for the crime of standing up to a government that denies them the  right to shape their own destinies,' wrote one resident.  'And yet wealthy  citizens of Bangkok mourn the loss of a shopping centre,' he said, referring  to the torching of the upscale Centralworld mall.    These differences have cut across academia and civil society as well.    They go back to the days around the 2006 coup that ousted the exiled  Thaksin, who has been convicted of corruption and who is the UDD patron.   His role has often been a liability for the red shirts, because many see him as  discrediting any cause.    Puangthong says rural red shirts back Thaksin’s pro-poor programmes,  and do not care much about the corruption many detest him for.  'They feel  that they have been treated badly by the Bangkokians,' she said.  'Their power  in choosing and voting in an election has been blocked several times. '   Elections have been a key part of the political upheaval here in recent years,  including when the Democrats boycotted the 2006 vote that then incumbent  Thaksin had called to seek a new mandate amid protests by the yellow shirts  and a furore over his business dealings.    Thaksin’s party won most of legislative seats, but results were later  nullified.  His political party was disbanded for electoral violations.    In the first election after the military rule in 2007, rural voters voted into  power another pro-Thaksin party.  Two prime ministers from this party then  lost their offices through court verdicts.  Their brief tenures were marked by  rallies by the yellow shirts, who occupied the Suvarnabhumi international  airport in 2008.    With a changed configuration in parliament in December 2008, the  Democrats won a parliamentary that the UDD argues was maneuvered by the  military — and negated the results of votes that pro-Thaksin groups had won.    This cycle led to calls for a new social contract to respect the results of  elections, as the UDD launched its protest this year — its second since the  April 2009 one.    Abhisit has said that a new election would not solve these problems, but  critics say the government fears losing to pro-Thaksin groups.  In early May, a  month after the red shirts occupied Rajprasong, Abhisit offered a Nov.  14  poll date with a roadmap of reforms that addresses social and economic  inequalities.     Protest leaders were divided over the offer, the rally continued, and the  government revoked the poll date.  By the time the UDD leaders offered  unconditional talks in exchange for a ceasefire on May 18, the government  said this was not possible without ending the protest.     There are calls for a new poll and electoral and constitutional reforms, but  the government faces a credibility issue since its crackdown led to a casualty  count consisting almost totally of civilians, says Thitinan Pongsudhirak,  director of the Institute of Security and International Studies at Chulalongkorn  University.    He says that working with moderate red shirts and fixing 'parliamentary and  constitutional processes,' including laws that banned elected politicians,  could bypass Thaksin’s clout and allow real dialogue.    A new election at this point is needed — not because it is a UDD demand —  but because the government must take 'political responsibility' for the deaths  in the crackdown and the deep wounds these have caused, says Tep, a  doctoral student. 