Relations between Sri Lanka and European Union (EU), which turned frosty  around six months back, appear to be thawing as the government makes a last- ditch stand to regain a crucial trade concession that has been suspended over  human rights issues hounding the south Asian island state. A high-powered government delegation led by Sri Lanka’s Attorney General  Mohan Peiris and including Finance Secretary Dr P. B.  Jayasundera and Foreign  Secretary Romesh Jayasinghe returned home over the weekend following talks  with EU officials in Brussels, considered the regional bloc’s de facto capital.  The meeting was the second in two months over the possible resumption of  a tax free trade pact between Sri Lanka and the EU. 'The discussions have been cordial and held in a constructive atmosphere,'  said Bernard Savage, Head of Delegation to Sri Lanka and the Maldives from  the European Commission, declining to give details of the talks. However, in what western diplomats, who declined to be named, see as a  'refreshing attitude from Sri Lanka,' the Sri Lankan official team, during their  Brussels meeting, invited the EU to be partners in a three-year post-war  development project costing 3 billion U. S.  dollars that is to be launched soon,  according to a foreign ministry statement released to the media after the  talks. The statement added that Jayasundera made the offer during a meeting of  the delegation with Dr Kristalina Georgiva, European Commissioner for  International Cooperation, Humanitarian Aid and Crisis Response. In January, the EU suspended Sri Lanka’s tax free exports to Europe for a  range of products, including garments, over Colombo’s refusal to cooperate  with an EU probe team organised in mid-2009 to ascertain whether the  country had implemented 27 international conventions on human and labour  rights, environment and good governance.  The government said such a probe  was a violation of the country’s sovereignty. The EU concessions will continue until mid-July under a grace period of six  months in the hope that the dispute would be sorted out.  Rohan Masakorala, secretary general of the Joint Association of Apparel  Forum, an umbrella group representing hundreds of garment exporters, said  European buyers have been pinning down Sri Lankan manufacturers on the  trade concessions, which remain uncertain.  'Buyers are repeatedly asking us  whether tax free imports would be allowed,' Masakorala said. Relations between Sri Lanka and Europe have never been as bitter as they are  now, essentially over allegations by human rights groups and the West that  hundreds of civilians were killed or wounded during the fighting between  government troops and the secessionist Tamil rebels in the final stages of  the conflict. More than 80,000 combatants and civilians died throughout the decades- long war while thousands more were wounded or maimed.  The rebels were  finally defeated in May 2009, ending a near 30-year-long bruising battle for  some autonomy for minority Tamils. The Sri Lankan government said the EU was leveraging on these human rights  accusations to withdraw the trade benefits, which benefit the garment  industry the most.  The EU denied the charge, saying the suspension was  purely based on the rules of the Generalised System of Preferences Plus,  which sets out the criteria by which a country could enjoy such benefits. Garments are Sri Lanka’s biggest export, of which 60 percent goes to the EU  and the balance to the United States.  The sector stands to lose the most if the  concessions finally end in July. But optimism over the ongoing talks and that they would end positively with  a resumption of the trade benefits has been growing in recent weeks.  'I think there is a good chance we can get these concessions but the  government should also be realistic and give clear assurances that ILO  (International Labor Organization) conventions would be implemented,' noted  Anton Marcus, general secretary of a trade union representing workers in the  country’s free trade zones, where many garment factories are located. Earlier this month the government announced steps to bring about   reconciliation and healing in the aftermath of the war.  These include relaxing  some emergency regulations that have remained in place even after the war  ended and appointing a Reconciliation Commission on the lines of South  Africa’s Truth Commission, to give voice to the war victims and facilitate a  healing process for the nation. According to the foreign ministry, these measures were explained by the Sri  Lankan delegation to EU officials during last week’s talks in the Belgian  capital. Most garment industrialists, though worried about a possible end to the  concessions, are confident that there is light at the end of the tunnel. 'I don’t think the EU would want to jeopardise the jobs of over nearly  300,000 people who depend on this industry,' said the chief executive officer  of one of Sri Lanka’s largest garment firms, who declined to be named. 'I am sure these concessions would be won back.  Recent efforts by the  government have been aimed at wooing back the EU,' said another apparel  exporter, also speaking on condition of anonymity. 