A clumsy and failed attempt by Japan’s nine-month-old coalition government to  change the Japan-U. S.  Security Treaty, a post World War II landmark in bilateral  relations after the Japanese defeat and often referred to as the lynchpin in Asian  regional defence, has shaken domestic politics and fueled East Asian anxiety. Analysts predict tough times for Prime Minister Yukio Hatoyama, seen to  culminate in his resignation on Wednesday, after he stumbled and sparked a  political storm when he tried to move a controversial U. S marine base  stationed in Okinawa. Public support for Hatoyama’s democratic socialist government slid to 17  percent Monday, an ominous sign of disastrous results in the Upper House  elections in July.  On the international front, analysts see Japan’s political mess spilling into  disastrous regional consequences as Japan and the United States struggle to  come to a satisfactory conclusion amid domestic anger over Okinawa and a  tinderbox situation for U. S.  troops facing violence in Afghanistan.    'I would describe the situation in East Asia as dangerous and uncertain,' said  international relations expert Takeshi Inoguchi of University of Niigata, a  leading foreign studies institution. Inoguchi was referring to heightened alertness in East Asia after South Korea  and Japan decided to take stern action against North Korea, which has reacted  with its characteristic dogmatism by threatening war even as evidence  emerged that it had carried out the sinking of a South Korean warship in  March near the maritime border with the authoritarian regime. China, a key player in Asian security, is the lone supporter of the North and is  not throwing its weight behind South Korea.  Other issues creating tense regional relations include Chinese military  activities in Japanese waters that have, for the moment, been smoothed in an  agreement forged on Monday to pursue further talks between Chinese  premier Wen Jiabao and Hatoyama during the former’s visit to Tokyo this  week.  Inoguchi said it is difficult to predict what will happen next.  An unfortunate  confluence of factors, namely, 'Japan’s weak leadership,' the anticipated  victory of the opposition in South Korea’s local elections on Wednesday, and  Chinese reports of local labour and rural unrest turning into a headache for  Beijing, 'can only mean a more explosive East Asia,' he said. Last week Hatoyama fired cabinet minister Mizuho Fukushima, leader of a  small leftist party, after she refused to sign a document approving the  relocation of the Futenma U. S.  military air base to a less crowded part of  Okinawa, citing it was against the party’s campaign pledge. Professor Masao Okonogi, an expert on the Korean peninsula, says the  ongoing political crisis has turned the spotlight once again on the future of  the Japan-U. S.  Security Treaty, which has long been a thorny issue on the  domestic front and a relentless quagmire for Japanese governments. 'Any attempt to change the bilateral military alliance, which the Japanese  public thinks is unfair, signals a treacherous path for governments as you can  see from what is happening now,' he said. The Japan-U. S.  military alliance allows Japan to defend itself from foreign  invasion but prevents it from participating in an attack.  In addition, Japan is  host to the largest number of U. S.  military and naval bases in Asia, where  they are heavily involved in U. S. -led wars in the region. Japan’s defence policy views the Treaty as crucial to efforts to forestall  threats posed by North Korea and China, which are seen as potential dangers  to Japan’s national security.  But China and North Korea view the military pact between Japan and the  United States as a throwback to Cold War diplomacy. Analysts say any hopes the Japanese public may have had to push for a more  equal military alliance with Washington have been dashed as tensions grow  and the lack of leadership on the domestic front leaves little room for  meaningful negotiation. Professor Akira Kato, an international politics expert at Obirin University, said  an equal alliance with the United States would mean allowing Japan to rearm  itself.  Japan has a formidable Self Defence Force (SDF) that cannot be officially  named a military under its postwar pacifist Constitution.  A tortuous change enacted in the Japan-U. S.  Security Pact two decades ago  now permits, among other stipulations, the Japanese SDF to participate in  operations with the U. S.  security forces stationed in the country.    But leftist political parties such as the Social Democratic Party, which has  abandoned the ruling coalition over policy disagreements, calls for the  opposite.  Its policy is to 'scale down the SDF and transform the bilateral  Security Pact into peace and goodwill. 'Analysts say such foreign policy row is one pressing reason why the Japanese  platform, such as what is identified with the conservative Liberal Democratic  Party, remains shaky in terms of negotiating for a better deal with the United  States over U. S.  base relocation. 'With political and public opinion divided, the looming insecurity in East Asia  and Japan’s shaky politics, the Japan-U. S.  security treaty continues to play a  fundamental role in Asian security with all its other implications,' said Obirin  University’s Kato. 