As India mourns for the victims of one of its worst rail accidents that occurred  on Friday in eastern state West Bengal, the political class is divided on whether  the Maoist rebels were behind the incident that left 148 civilians dead. The accident — coming barely two weeks after the Maoists blew up a bus at  Dantewada in central India’s Chhattisgarh, killing several common people  along with troopers recruited from among villagers — has triggered a debate  on whether the Maoists are now choosing soft targets like civilians, whose  cause they supposedly espouses at the point of gun. Security analysts fear that the Maoists are finally targeting the civilians. According to New Delhi-based defence and strategic analyst C.  Uday Bhaskar,  the May 28 incident clearly marks the beginning of deliberate and audacious  terrorism by the perpetrators and will need to be dealt with accordingly. 'The fact that they are now resorting to brazen terrorism and killing innocent  civilians alters the nature of the challenge to the Indian state,' says Bhaskar. 'A quick survey of related incidents this year indicates that the Friday attack  is the  ninth major strike by the Maoist rebels since February this year and the  fourth  attack on trains and related railway assets in this month alone,'  Bhaskar says. 'The situation can worsen if the government’s response is as usual.  The  authorities must react strongly with a well-thought out strategy,' he warns. 'If the investigation establishes that the Maoists were responsible for the  criminal act, it proves once again that they have become indifferent to the  impact of their actions on the general public,' writes B.  Raman, director of the  Institute for Topical Studies in Chennai in his column.   According to India’s home minister P Chidambaram, the Maoists 'don’t  discriminate between security forces and civilians'. 'They simply kill and then find reasons,' he said in a recent interview, taking a  dig at the civil society activists who often sympathise with the movement that  originated from abject rural poverty and extreme oppression in India’s tribal  regions by the mainstream governments at both the state and central levels. The accident also laid bare the security lapses of the Indian authorities that  have termed the Maoists India’s biggest internal threat. The West Bengal police have blamed the Maoists for the train crash, though  Mamata Banerjee, India’s Railway Minister and a firebrand opposition leader  from communist-ruled West Bengal, indicated that the derailment of  Jnaneshwari Express bound for Mumbai from Kolkata was a political  conspiracy.   India’s Home Minister P.  Chidambaram, however, said Monday that the  Maoists  were suspected to have triggered the rail tragedy on Friday.  'The  needle of suspicion points to the Communist Party of India-Maoist [CPI- Maoist] or its front organisation,' he said. However, the People's Committee against Police Atrocities (PCPA), a Maoist- backed organisation on whom the sabotage has been blamed, said it was not  behind the incident. Instead, accusing West Bengal’s ruling Communist Party of India-Marxist  (CPI-M) of hatching the conspiracy, PCPA spokesperson Asit Mahato told TV  channels over telephone: 'We are in no way behind this.  We condemn the  killing of innocent people. 'PCPA was earlier blamed for hijacking India’s swankiest and fastest passenger  train Rajdhani Express in the same region in October last year. Indian Railway, which has a total route length of 3,327 kilometres and a track  length of 111,600 km, transports nearly 20 million passengers every day,  making it vulnerable to attacks by the homegrown Maoist rebels as well as  Islamist terrorists. While the Maoists, who espouse the annihilation of the Indian state,  periodically launch attacks on security forces, the civilians are often  casualties of their violence as India fights a debilitating war with the rebels,  believed to be hovering around 22,000 and living mostly in the forests. The Maoist movement began in the late 1960s in a northern town of West  Bengal state called Naxalbari, from which the word ‘Naxalites’ or ‘Naxals’ , as  the rebels are also known, is derived.  It subsided in the early 1970s only to  resurface as a more violent force that now operates under the Communist  Party of India (Maoist).  Analysts say the government response should not be casual anymore. 'The immediate tactical response to the Friday train derailment is to improve the professionalism of the RPF (the Railway Protection Force) and use  available technology for early warning and detection of acts of railway  sabotage. 'If airline and airport security has received the kind of attention it now does,  then the train passenger should not be treated as a poor cousin,' says  Bhaskar. According to Ajit Kumar Singh, a research fellow with New Delhi-based  Institute for Conflict Management, almost all steps to upgrade the security  apparatus of the railway are in preliminary stages of implementation. 'Given the sheer length of the railways and the movement of passengers and  goods across the country, the available numbers of railway protection  personnel are a fraction of what is actually needed. Singh adds that an estimated 90,883 posts are currently vacant, of which an  estimated 40 percent are safety-related posts, including those of gangmen,  who inspect and maintain railway tracks. 'Given the rampaging expansion of Maoist activities and disruptive  capabilities, it is clear that India’s security establishment will not be able to  establish dominance and a sufficient preventive capability on the sprawling  railways network against the Maoists for some time to come,' he concludes.  