The homes of the barrio of Comuna 13, tightly packed  improvised brick and concrete structures that take on a semi- rural nature the closer one gets to the murky swift-moving Río  Cauca, blanket the hills of the western edge of this city of  2. 5 million. A district of some 135,000 inhabitants, Comuna 13 represents  the complicated renaissance of a city famed for producing  both Colombia's most famous painter (Fernando Botero) and  the world's most notorious drug trafficker (Pablo Escobar). Abutting this grindingly poor area is the Parque Biblioteca  José Luis Arroyave, a sparkling new multipurpose complex  that features a library, an exhibition hall and a community- run cafeteria.  Within view of its doors, a new metrocable  system ferries commuters to and from their hillside  dwellings at dizzying heights in a series of cable-propelled  eight-passenger pods, cutting travel time for community  residents in half. 'In a zone very affected by violence and poverty, we wanted  to organise this project and work trying to reclaim public  space and benefit the population here,' says Mauricio Mejía,  who works with the Proyecto Urbano Integral, an urban  development project based on similar initiatives in Brasil  and originally spearheaded by Medellín's former mayor,  Sergio Fajardo. Along with the city's former director of urban projects,  Alejandro Echeverri, in 2009 Fajardo - in office from 2003  until 2007 and currently running for vice president on a  ticket with former Bogota mayor Antanas Mockus - was awarded  the Curry Stone Design Prize, an eminent architectural award  that cited the duo's 'bold and ambitious public works plan'  for Medellín as having 'helped revitalise its poorest  neighbourhoods'. The award set out for particular commendation the city's  42,200-square-foot Orquideorama (a botanical garden topped  by a wooden meshwork roof somewhat resembling unfurling  flowers), and the nearly-prehistoric looking obsidian Parque  Biblioteca España. However, Medellín continues to exist as a paradox: On one  hand a lush, green city vibrating with life and stunning  modern architecture, and on the other hand a place of  frightened people who speak in whispers of criminals they  refuse to even name.  And it has remained quite a deadly  place for many of its inhabitants. During the first three months of 2010, Medellín's murder  rate increased 54. 8 percent from the previous year.  Only  steps away from the Parque Biblioteca and in other barrios  around the city, drug gangs continue to dominate, the  fallout, many locals say, of an incomplete or ineffective  demobilisation process of the country's ring-wing  paramilitary groups undertaken by the government of outgoing  President Álvaro Uribe. 'This is a war where impunity reigns,' says a church worker  who has been active in Medellín's poorest neighbourhoods for  many years and who did not wish to be named.  'There is  silence, fear, and people can't talk about what's going on. 'An umbrella group of paramilitary factions, the Autodefensas  Unidas de Colombia (AUC), were formed by Carlos Castaño in  1997 and thereafter acted as a ruthless counterpoint to the  Colombian state's war against Colombia's two rebel groups,  the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia (FARC) and  the smaller Ejército de Liberación Nacional (ELN).  During  the most violent years of Colombia's civil war, it was the  AUC, not the Colombian army, that succeeded in driving the  FARC and ELN from the comunas around Medellín. Linked to dozens of massacres throughout the country, the  AUC began a demobilisation process in 2002 whereby  significantly reduced sentences were offered in exchange for  paramilitary members confessing their crimes, making amends  with their victims and ceasing criminal activities.  Castaño  himself was murdered in April 2004, allegedly in a dispute  centered around the AUC's deepening involvement in the drug  trade, and his body recovered two years later. In Medellín, this demobilisation process took on a  particularly chaotic and violent nature. One of the most powerful leaders of the AUC, Diego Murillo  Bejarano aka Don Berna, was (like Carlos Castaño's brother  Fidel) a former close associate of the drug trafficking  Medellín Cartel, having acted as one of the top enforcers  for a faction run by the Galeano family, who were eventually  dominated by sectors loyal to the late drug kingpin Pablo  Escobar. Having commanded the AUC's Bloque Cacique Nutibara, which  had around 1,000 members, as well as the Bloque Héroes de  Granada, which was thought to have numbered slightly over  2,000, amidst demobilisation Murillo Bejarano's faction of  the AUC fought a brief, vicious war of attrition in  Medellín's slums with the Bloque Metro of Castaño loyalist  Carlos Mauricio Garcia, alias Double Zero, who was found  murdered in May 2004. Following the demobilisation process - which many in  Medellín claim was largely a charade where non-paramilitary  actors were recruited from around the city to go through the  motions of pacification - Murillo Bejarano, despite sitting  in a Colombian prison under the terms of the country's  Justice and Peace Law, is said by residents and authorities  to have become the dominant criminal figure in the city. Murillo Bejarano's omnipotence over what is colloquially  referred to as the Oficina de Envigado (named after the  Medellín neighbourhood where many narcotraffickers live)  extended to such an extent that the tit-for-tat slayings and  turf wars that have marked the city over the last two  decades gradually decreased as he solidified his control  over many of the city's criminal gangs.  There was even a  term used by locals for the enforced calm Murillo Bejarano  brought to the city's criminal underworld, donbernabilidad,  a mordant pun on the Spanish concept of gobernabilidad, or  governability. It was, however, a consolidation that had deadly  consequences for those who questioned it.  A number of  community leaders in Medellín, such as Haider Ramírez from  Comuna 13 and Alexander Pulgarín from the La Sierra  neighbourhood, have been murdered in recent years, with the  latter killing being characterised in a report by Colombia's  government as 'a premeditated act' designed to silence a  voice that would not go along with criminal system being put  in place in the slums. When Murillo Bejarano was deported to the United States in  May 2008 along with a slew of other top AUC leaders to face  drug trafficking charges, the Oficina de Envigado is said to  have badly fractured.  One of the group's chieftains, Fabio  León Vélez Correa, alias Nito, was murdered in September  2009 and two remaining factions have formed with guns drawn  behind one of two leaders, known by their aliases as  Valenciano and Sebastian. Colombian government estimates say that the groups operate  in of Colombia's 32 departments and boast around 400  members. It is the chaos of this power struggle, residents say, that  has led to the palpable spike in violence as ever- diminishing and reorganising groups of traffickers vie for  control of the city and access to the Río Cauca, a key  conduit for cocaine and arms smuggling, as well as human  trafficking. Despite the palpable sense of hope in Colombian cities such  as Medellín these days, the incomplete demobilisation of the  paramilitaries, along with the continued threat of the not- yet-vanquished rebel groups, will continue to present a  serious challenge to whoever wins this month's presidential  contest to succeed the eight-year tenure of Álvaro Uribe. 'These groups basically took the generous offer of  demobilisation by Uribe,' says Bruce M.  Bagley, the chair of  the Department of International Studies at the University of  Miami and a longtime Colombia observer.  'But demobilise is a  relative term. '*Michael Deibert is a Visiting Fellow at the Centre for  Peace and Reconciliation Studies at Coventry University and  the author of Notes from the Last Testament: The Struggle  for Haiti (Seven Stories Press).  His blog can be read at  www. michaeldeibert. blogspot. com