Some CIA officers involved in the agency's drone strikes  programme in Pakistan and elsewhere are privately expressing  their opposition to the programme within the agency, because  it is helping al Qaeda and its allies recruit, according to a  retired military officer in contact with them. 'Some of the CIA operators are concerned that, because of  its blowback effect, it is doing more harm than good,' said  Jeffrey Addicott, former legal adviser to U. S.  Special  Forces and director of the Centre for Terrorism Law at St  Mary's University in San Antonio, Texas, in an interview  with IPS. Addicott said the CIA operatives he knows have told him the  drone strikes are being used effectively by al Qaeda and  Taliban leaders to recruit more militants.  CIA officers 'are very upset' with the drone strike policy,  Addicott said.  'They'll do what the boss says, but they view  it as a harmful exercise. ' 'They say we're largely killing rank and file Pakistani  Taliban, and they are the ones who are agitated by the  campaign,' he added. Because the drone strikes kill innocent civilians and  bystanders along with leaders from far away, they 'infuriate  the Muslim male', said Addicott, thus making them more  willing to join the movement.  The men in Pakistan's tribal  region 'view Americans as cowards and weasels', he added.  Addicott retired from the U. S.  Army as a lieutenant colonel  in 2000 after serving for six years as senior legal adviser  to the Special Operations Forces but is still a consultant  for the U. S.  military on issues of terrorism and law.  Addicot said the CIA officers expressing concern about the  blowback effects of the drone policy are 'mid-grade and  below'.  They learned about the impact of drone strikes on recruiting  by extremist leaders in Pakistan from intelligence gathered  by CIA and the National Security Agency, which intercepts  electronic communications, according to Addicott.  They have informed high-level CIA officials about their  concerns that the programme is backfiring, Addicott told  IPS.  'The people at the top are not believers,' said Addicott,  referring to the CIA.  'They know that the objective is not  going to be achieved. 'The complaints by CIA operatives about the drone strikes'  blowback effect reported by Addicott are identical to  warnings by military and intelligence officials reported in  April 2009 by Jonathan Landay of McClatchy newspapers.   Landay quoted an intelligence official with deep involvement  in both Afghanistan and Pakistan as saying al Qaeda and the  Taliban had used the strikes in propaganda to 'portray  Americans as cowards who are afraid to face their enemies  and risk death'. The official called the operations 'a major catalyst' for  the jihadi movement in Pakistan. A military official involved in counterterrorism operations  told Landay the drone strikes were a 'recruiting windfall  for the Pakistani Taliban'. The CIA operatives' opposition to the drone strikes  programme extends to Afghanistan, Yemen, Somalia and Sudan,  all of which now have confirmed deaths from drone strikes,  according to Addicott.  The official goal of the geographical expansion of drone  strikes is to destroy or disrupt al Qaeda.  But al Qaeda is  less a major organisation than 'a mentality' in most Middle  Eastern countries, Addicott said, and the CIA officers fear  that the strikes will only reinforce that way of thinking. Addicott said the drone programme has been driven by  President Barack Obama, rather than by the CIA.  'Obama's  trying to show people that we're winning,' he added. The programme was originally authorised by President George  W.  Bush against a relatively short list of high-level al  Qaeda officials, and with highly restrictive conditions on  approval of each strike.  The strike could not be approved  unless the target was identified with high confidence, and a  complete assessment of 'collateral damage' had to ensure  against significant civilian casualties.  In early 2008, however, Bush approved the removal of  previous restraints.  As recounted by David Sanger in his  2009 book, 'The Inheritance', Bush authorised strikes  against targets merely based on visual evidence of a  'typical' al Qaeda motorcade or a group entering a house  that had been linked to al Qaeda or its Pakistani Taliban  allies. As a top national security aide to Bush acknowledged to  Sanger, the shift was 'risky' because, 'you can hit the  wrong house or mistakenly misidentify the motorcade'.  It also meant that anyone who could be linked in some way to  al Qaeda, the Taliban or 'associated forces' could now be  targeted for drone attacks. The Obama administration has continued to justify the  programme as aimed at high-value targets, suggesting that it  can degrade al Qaeda as an organisation by a 'decapitation'  strategy, according to Addicott.   However administration  officials now privately admit that the objective of the  programme is to 'demoralise the rank and file', he said.  That won't work, according to Addicott, because, 'These are  tribal people.  They don't view life and death the way we  expect them to. ' In effect, the drone strikes programme has become an  'attrition' strategy for Pakistan, Addicott said.  Such a strategy in Pakistan's tribal region appears to be  futile.  Madrassas in the region have churned out tens of  thousands of young men with militant views, and their  activities are spread across hundreds of sites in the  region.  A U. S.  military intelligence official told Bill  Roggio of The Long War Journal in 2009 that there were 157  training camps and 'more than 400 support locations' in the  tribal northwest.  Within the administration, it appears that the logic behind  the programme is that it has to be seen to be doing  something about al Qaeda.  'The argument I get from people  associated with the programme,' said Micah Zenko, a fellow  in Conflict Prevention at the Council on Foreign Relations,  'is the same as the one [CIA Director Leon] Panetta gave  last year. ' 'Very frankly,' Panetta declared May 18, 2009, 'it's the  only game in town in terms of confronting or trying to  disrupt the al Qaeda leadership. ' Zenko, who has studied the bureaucratic in-fighting  surrounding such limited uses of military force, told IPS  drone strikes have appealed to the Obama administration  because they offer 'clear results that are obtained quickly  and are easily measured'. All the other tools that might be used to try to reduce al  Qaeda influence in Pakistan and elsewhere take a long time,  require cooperation among multiple actors and have no  powerful political constituency behind them, Zenko observed. Dissent from those who are involved in the programme itself  has little effect when it is up against what is perceived as  political pressure to show progress against al Qaeda - no  matter how illusory.  *Gareth Porter is an investigative historian and journalist  specialising in U. S.  national security policy.  The paperback  edition of his latest book, 'Perils of Dominance: Imbalance  of Power and the Road to War in Vietnam', was published in  2006. 