Within three days of Israel’s attack on the Gaza Freedom Flotilla Monday, the  pro-Israel lobby in Brussels was already seeking to deflect attention from the  killing of nine peace activists in international waters. The European Friends of Israel, a grouping of parliamentarians, issued a  statement Jun 3, which made no reference to the assault earlier in the week.   Instead it highlighted the findings of a survey published by the Institute for  Management Development in Switzerland, which named Israel as the  economy most resilient to variations in the global economy and as a top  spender on scientific research and innovation. These findings might help explain why the collective response of the  European Union’s 27 member states to the attacks has been weak.  For  despite growing revulsion at Israel’s occupation of Palestine among ordinary  people throughout the world, the EU has been so impressed with the robust  performance of the Israeli economy that it has integrated it into many of its  activities in recent years. While some individual EU governments made plain their displeasure with the  attacks by summoning Israeli ambassadors to an urgent meeting, the Union’s  foreign policy chief Catherine Ashton merely described the attacks as a  'tragedy', a term usually reserved for accidents.  Initially Ashton called on  Israel to conduct its own investigations.  When she released a subsequent  statement — during a visit to Russia — urging a 'full and impartial enquiry of  the events and circumstances', she did not specify if this should be  undertaken by Israel or by a United Nations-appointed team. Over the past decade Israel has been integrated into several EU programmes,  ranging from satellite navigation to business promotion.  The European  Commission, the EU’s executive, administers many of these programmes.  Yet  José Manuel Barroso, the Commission’s president, would not comment when  asked if he would be seeking a review of Israeli participation in the EU’s  activities.  'I fully agree with the position taken by the EU High Representative  Cathy Ashton,' he told IPS, declining to elaborate. Barroso is one of several top-level politicians in Brussels to have cultivated  strong links with the pro-Israel lobby.  Last year, he was guest of honour at  the opening of a new EU affairs office for the European Jewish Congress (EJC),  where he praised the organisation for 'being fully committed to the  resumption of the peace process' in the Middle East. The EJC has subsequently mounted an intense campaign designed to convince  the European Parliament not to approve motions critical of Israel’s conduct in  the occupied Palestinian territories. The EJC responded to Monday’s massacre perpetrated by Israeli troops on  board the Turkish-owned vessel the Mavi Marvara by calling on the EU to  officially declare one of the key groups in the Free Gaza campaign as a  terrorist organisation.  Moshe Kantor, the EJC’s president, accused the  Foundation for Human Rights and Freedoms and Humanitarian Relief (known  by the acronym IHH) as having links to al Qaeda.  The Israeli government has  made similar claims recently, but these have been fiercely contested by  international peace activists and supporters of the Palestinian solidarity  movement, who insist the allegations are baseless. Scientific research has been among the largest areas of cooperation between  the EU and Israel.  The EU has become a major provider of research grants to  Israeli firms and research institutes over the past decade, thanks to Israel’s  status as the main foreign partner for the EU’s multi-annual research  programme, which has been allocated 53 billion euros (64 billion dollars) for  the 2007-13 period.  Companies such as Motorola Israel, Elbit and Israel  Aerospace Industries are taking part in the programme’s activities. Although these companies have manufactured weapons and components  used in attacks on Palestinian civilians, Israel’s war against Lebanon in 2006  and by the US-led alliance in Afghanistan, Janez Potocnik, the EU’s research  commissioner between 2004 and 2009, expressed no regrets about the firms’  involvement in a programme financed by the European taxpayer.  'What we  have tried to provide is something that is of benefit of European partners,' he  told IPS.  'We are talking about research itself and nothing more than  research. 'The EU, meanwhile, would not support a motion brought before the United  Nations Human Rights Council Jun 3 condemning Israel’s attacks.  Most  European states on the council abstained from the vote, with Italy and the  Netherlands siding with the US in voting against the resolution, which was  carried by 32 votes to 3.  The resolution demanded that Israel lift the blockade  of Gaza and that it immediately allow food, medicine and other essential  supplies to be delivered there. Maysa Zorob, Brussels representative with the Palestinian human rights group  Al Haq, said she was a 'bit sick' of how the EU has been willing to call for  Israel to conduct its own investigations into human rights abuses by its armed  forces.  'This whole ‘let’s ask for investigations’ approach is getting us  nowhere,' she added.  'Nothing concrete is being done by the EU or anyone  else. '