A United Nations Working Group that monitors the activities of  mercenaries worldwide is now trying to rein in the widespread  human rights abuses by private military and security companies  (PMSCs), which are being increasingly deployed in war zones  and peacekeeping operations. A draft International Convention on the Regulation,  Surveillance and Monitoring of PMSCs, which is to be  presented to the Human Rights Council in Geneva next  September, has already been discussed by more than 150  academics and non-governmental organisations (NGOs)  worldwide. The proposed draft, which spells out legislative oversight  and judicial measures to punish private security firms for  any unlawful acts, has also been submitted to member states  for their comments. If the treaty is eventually approved by the U. N.  General  Assembly, perhaps next year, all 192 member states will be  called upon to abide by it. Amada Benavides, a member of the Working Group on the Use of  Mercenaries, told IPS a new convention was necessitated also  because the current definition of 'mercenaries' could not be  applied to PMSCs and their employees. A 'mercenary' is categorised as an individual gun for hire,  while PMSCs are collective enterprises established as legal  entities. After three years of negotiations and discussions, the  Working Group has finalised a draft related exclusively to  PMSCs, she added. Asked about the extent of U. N.  involvement with PMSCs,  Benavides said she does not have the exact numbers, but  confirmed that there are number of U. N.  agencies which use  these private security firms. 'There is an industry lobby promoting their services,' she  said. In the 1990s, there were more than 100 new private military  companies offering their services to governments,  multinational companies, humanitarian agencies, NGOs and to  the United Nations and its multi-billion-dollar peacekeeping  operations. According to the latest statistics from the U. S.  Department  of Defence released in April, there are now more private  contractors than U. S.  troops in Afghanistan alone: 107,292  civilian contractors compared with 78,000 soldiers. The duties of these PMSCs include protecting personnel and  military bases, providing staff at checkpoints, training  police forces, advising on security and military strategy,  providing and maintaining weapons and ammunition,  interrogating suspects and prisoners, providing intelligence  services and even participating in combat operations, said  Benavides. The U. N.  Common Supply Database (UNCSD) reportedly consists  of several PMSCs, including Sandline International, IDG  Security, and Greystone of the Blackwater Group. Jayantha Dhanapala, a former U. N.  Under-Secretary-General  for Disarmament Affairs, told IPS: 'I find it deeply  disturbing that the U. N.  should be hiring private security  firms in what is a creeping privatisation of the security  functions of states and international organisations. 'He said that Blackwater, and Sandline International before  that, both private security firms, 'have exposed the neo- mercenary character and accountability shortcomings in these  arrangements, especially in the context of the Geneva  Conventions' governing the rules of war, particularly in the  treatment of prisoners of war (POWS) and civilians. 'The linkages of the security firms hired should be  transparent to the member states of the U. N.  at all times,'  he added. Meanwhile, there has been a claim by 250 plaintiffs under  the alien tort act accusing some of these PMSCs of rape and  threats of rape; sexual assaults; electric shocks and  beatings; prolonged hanging from limbs; forced nudity of  POWs; hooding; isolated detention and religious intolerance. These abuses have been prevalent mostly in Iraq and  Afghanistan where military forces from the United States and  members of the North Atlantic Treaty Organisation (NATO) are  in command. Following a conference on Haiti in March, which was  organised by a trade association representing many PMSCs, 18  NGOs wrote a letter to U. S.  Secretary of State Hillary  Clinton urging that funds pledged by the United States and  other members of the international community 'should be  directed towards rebuilding Haiti, not to international  private security contractors'. The NGOs included the Centre for Constitutional Rights, the  American Friends Service Committee, TransAfrica Forum,  Foreign Policy in Focus, Grassroots International and the  American Jewish World Service. The estimated value of the PMSC industry rose from 33  billion dollars in 1990 to about 100 billion dollars in  2006. That figure is expected to increase to over 200 billion  dollars in 2010, according to Benavides. The PMSCs currently operating in war zones include  ArmorGroup International, Blackwater Security Consulting,  Dyncorp International, EOD Technology Inc. , KBR, Kulak  Construction Co. , Prime Projects International, PWC  Logistics, Global Risks Solutions, Mitchell Jessen and  Associates, the Shaw Group and Sallyport Global Services. Some of these companies have been accused of advising the  Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) on torture and body- guarding techniques, and also trained police forces in  torture techniques in at least one Latin American country. The killings of some 17 civilians in Nisoor Square in the  Iraqi capital of Baghdad in September 2007 have been  attributed to one of the security contractors hired by the  United States.  Additionally, some of these contractors have also been  accused of several irregularities, including poor working  conditions, excessive working hours, ill-treatment, and  deprival of medical services to employees, particularly  those from developing nations such as Nepal, the Philippines  and Bangladesh. Speaking at a recent seminar on 'Accountability for Private  Security Contractors: the Role of the U. N. ', Jeremy Scahill,  an investigative journalist, said so far no one has been  prosecuted for crimes committed by PMSCs. 'Now they are hiring private contractors to keep an eye on  security contractors,' said Scahill, author of 'Blackwater:  the Rise of the World's Most Powerful Mercenary Army',  pointing out the irony of the situation. Phillip Alston, U. N.  Special Rapporteur on Summary  Executions, is quoted as saying that the existence of a zone  of de facto impunity for killings by private contractors  operating in Iraq and elsewhere has been tolerated for far  too long. 'Government officials, with whom I met, acknowledged this  lack of accountability, and it now seems to be recognised  that this vacuum is neither legally or ethically defensible  - nor politically sustainable,' he added. 