The administration of President Barack Obama is considering  using Afghanistan's U. S. -run Bagram Air Base prison to  indefinitely detain terrorism suspects captured far from a  battlefield and who have not been charged with a crime -  without any judicial oversight. A senior U. S.  official reportedly told the Los Angeles Times  that the Obama administration wants to detain and  interrogate non-Afghan terrorism suspects captured in  countries outside Afghanistan in a section of the Bagram  prison, even after it turns the prison over to Afghan  control.  The U. S.  government has stated its intention to turn over  control of the Bagram detention facility to the Afghan  government early next year.  In May, a federal court ruled  that unlike at Guantánamo, prisoners in U. S.  custody at  Bagram, including those who were captured far from any  battlefield and brought to Afghanistan, cannot challenge  their detention in U. S.  courts.  That decision paves the way  for the U. S.  government to use Bagram to detain terrorism  suspects indefinitely.  'The Guantánamo problem is not solved simply by recreating a  Guantánamo somewhere else.  Closing Guatánamo is essential  but it is equally important that the Obama administration  put an end to the illegal indefinite detention policy behind  Guantánamo,' said Melissa Goodman, staff attorney with the  ACLU National Security Project.  'The entire world is not a battlefield.  We cannot just  capture people far from any zone of armed conflict and lock  up them up indefinitely without any access to the courts or  due process.  Such a policy not only flies in the face of our  justice system, but opens up the possibility that mistakes  will be made and the wrong people will be imprisoned - which  is exactly what we have seen at Guantánamo,' she added. The ACLU filed a Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) lawsuit  in September 2009 demanding information about Bagram, which  has thus far been shrouded in much secrecy.  In response to  the lawsuit, the government turned over some important  information but continues to withhold key details about the  prisoners detained at Bagram, as well as information about  the implementation of its new detainee status review  procedures and about a separate 'secret jail' on the base. The secret facility is reportedly run by either the Joint  Special Operations Command or the Defence Intelligence  Agency, and detainees maintain they have been abused there.   It is unclear whether guards and interrogators at the secret  facility are subject to the same rules that apply at the  main Bagram detention facility. 'The possibility of continuing to hold and interrogate  detainees at Bagram is even more disturbing given the lack  of transparency about the facility,' said Goodman.  'Plans to  continue holding prisoners in U. S.  custody at Bagram must be  accompanied by the disclosure of key information about what  currently goes on there. 'In a related development, four Bagram detainees were given  their first opportunity to appear at a pre-trial hearing  last week.  According to Reuters and the Associated Press,  the detainees - three adult brothers and their elderly  father - were brought before a panel of three Afghan judges  on Jun.  1.  The proceeding was the first pre-trial hearing in  advance of the first trial ever to be held at the U. S. - controlled detention facility.  But legal advocacy groups are expressing concern about the  lack of transparency surrounding the trial procedures, the  apparent failure to provide detainees with adequate access  to their lawyers before the hearing, and lack of  arrangements for appropriate translation services. Tina Foster, the attorney who represents a number of Bagram  detainees through the International Justice Network (IJN),  told IPS, 'Once again the Obama administration has simply  made a grand pronouncement of policy without any  transparency or accountability.  Given the failures of the  Obama-Bush track record on Military Commissions, it's hard  to imagine these would be anything other than Kangaroo court  proceedings. 'And Daphne Eviatar, senior counsel at Human Rights First  (HRF), said her group was 'dismayed that the proceeding so  far has been chaotic and (that) so little information has  been made available about how this trial will proceed and  whether more such trials are planned'. Since the U. S.  military first began detaining suspected  insurgents at Bagram eight years ago, none have been  accorded a trial by U. S.  authorities.  Some have been  transferred to an Afghan-run detention facility and provided  summary trials there.  HRF has in the past criticised such  trials for not meeting the minimum standards of due process. In the past year, the group says, the U. S.  military has  begun to provide more meaningful hearings for detainees at  Bagram that allow the suspects to call 'reasonably  available' witnesses and to be represented by 'personal  representatives' chosen by the U. S.  military.  However, HRF points out that the detainees still have no  right to legal representation or to see much of the evidence  used against them, as much of it remains classified.  The  organisation has repeatedly asked to see the rules governing  these new Detainee Review Board procedures, but the military  has not responded. News reports of the first hearing last week also revealed  that the trial procedures are inadequately developed.  One  defence lawyer reportedly complained that he had not an  opportunity even to meet his client or to review his  client's file.  And when the hearing began, it became clear  that the government had failed to provide the necessary  translators to make it comprehensible.  The trial was being conducted in Dari, rather than in the  detainees' native language, which is Pashto.  Although there  were translators available to translate to English, there  were none who could translate the proceedings into Pashto. Eviatar told IPS that, 'We support the idea of trials being  presided over by Afghan judges, (but) only if those trials  are fair trials and if they're conducted in a language that  the detainees understands, or at least with interpreters who  can translate the proceedings into the detainee's language. ' 'Obviously, a trial held in Dari without interpreters  available to translate to Pashto, when the detainees speak  and understand Pashto and not Dari, won't be comprehensible  to the detainees, and therefore by definition won't be  fair,' she added. 