While U. S.  officials insist they are making progress in  reversing the momentum built up by the Taliban insurgency over  the last several years, the latest news from Afghanistan  suggests the opposite may be closer to the truth. Even senior military officials are conceding privately that  their much-touted new counterinsurgency strategy of 'clear,  hold and build' in contested areas of the Pashtun southern  and eastern parts of the country are not working out as  planned despite the 'surge' of some 20,000 additional U. S.   troops over the past six months. Casualties among the nearly 130,000 U. S.  and other NATO  troops now deployed in Afghanistan are also mounting  quickly. Four U. S.  troops were killed Wednesday when Taliban fire  brought down their helicopter in the southern province of  Helmand, the scene of a major U. S.  offensive centred on the  strategic farming region of Marja over the past several  months. That brought the death toll of NATO soldiers just this week  to 23, including 10 killed in various attacks around the  country on Monday, the deadliest day for NATO forces in two  years. 'It's been a tough week,' Pentagon spokesman Bryan Whitman  said Wednesday. Seventeen of the 23 were U. S.  soldiers, bringing the total  U. S.  death toll in and around Afghanistan since the U. S.   intervened to oust the Taliban from power in late 2001 to  more than 1,100, according to the independent iCasualties  website. While senior military officials attributed the steadily  rising toll to Washington's surge of a total of 30,000  additional troops by next month, as well as the beginning of  the Taliban's annual summer offensive, none other than  Secretary of Defence Robert Gates warned that the U. S.  and  its NATO allies were running out of time to show results. 'The one thing none of the (alliance's) publics. . . including  the American public, will tolerate is the perception of  stalemate in which we're losing young men,' he said in  London Wednesday on the eve of a key NATO ministerial  meeting in Brussels this week at which Afghanistan will top  the agenda and Gates himself is expected to prod his  interlocutors to fulfil pledges to provide more troops. 'All of us, for our publics, are going to have to show by  the end of the year that our strategy is on the track,  making some headway,' he said. Obama, who last November set a July 2011 as the date after  which Washington would begin to withdraw U. S.  troops from  Afghanistan, has said his administration will conduct a  major review of U. S.  strategy and whether it is working at  the end of this year. The latest polling here shows a noticeable erosion of  support for Washington's commitment to the war compared to  eight months ago when Obama agreed to the Pentagon's  recommendations to send the 30,000 additional troops to  Afghanistan to bring the total U. S.  presence there to around  100,000.  An additional 34,000 troops from NATO and non-NATO allies  are supposed to be deployed there by year's end. According to a Washington Post/ABC News poll released  Thursday, 53 percent of respondents said the war in  Afghanistan, which last month, according to most measures,  exceeded the Vietnam conflict as the longest-running war in  U. S.  history, was 'not worth fighting'.  That was the highest  percentage in more than three years. The same poll found that 39 percent of the public believe  that Washington is losing the war, compared to 42 percent  who believe it is winning.  While public scepticism about the war appears to be growing,  the foreign policy elite, including within the military,  also seems increasingly doubtful for a number of reasons. Disillusionment with President Hamid Karzai - already  running high as a result of last year's rigged elections and  his tolerance for government and family corruption - gained  new momentum last weekend with the forced resignations of  his two top security officials, Interior Minister Hanif  Atmar and intelligence chief Amrullah Saleh, who were  considered by Western officials as among the most competent  of Karzai's cabinet members. The two men reportedly objected strongly to Karzai's order  to release all accused Taliban prisoners who are being held  without enough evidence for trials.  The order was seen as the latest in a series of moves  designed to reconcile with the Taliban leadership, a step  that Washington has strongly opposed until now.  Among other things, the U. S.  fears that such a move could  prompt leaders of the Northern Alliance, which consists of  non-Pashtun groups, to break with the government and prepare  for renewed civil war of the kind that devastated  Afghanistan before the Taliban first took control in 1996. Karzai's bid for reconciliation stems from his conviction,  according to a number of accounts, that U. S.  strategy is  unlikely to succeed in weakening - let alone defeating - the  Taliban and that his hold on power will ultimately rely on  reaching an accommodation with them. That impression may well be grounded in an accurate  assessment of the way Washington's counterinsurgency  strategy is actually playing out.  Indeed, the Marja campaign, which was heralded as a major  test of Washington's new strategy when it was launched in  February, appears to be faltering badly.  Late last month,  Washington's overall military commander, Gen.  Stanley  McChrystal, even referred to it as 'a bleeding ulcer'. While it initially succeeded in 'clearing' Taliban from the  region McChrystal's pledge that U. S.  troops would bring with  them an Afghan 'government in a box' that would provide  basic security and social services proved, as a feature  story in Thursday's Washington Post described it, 'largely  empty'. As a result of local disillusionment with the police and the  very few Afghan civilian officials that followed the U. S.   military into the area, insurgents have regrouped and in  some areas regained the offensive, according to the latest  reports.  One recent study found that the majority of the  population had become more antagonistic to NATO forces than  was the case before the operation began. The Marja experience has cast doubt on a yet more ambitious  and strategically critical operation planned for Kandahar.  While Washington had initially planned to launch a major  military operation to 'clear' Taliban from neighbourhoods in  and around the city before introducing the civilian  component of the counterinsurgency strategy, it has now  reversed the order in hopes of not alienating the local  population as it did in Marja.  But the presence of more police and civilian officials will  no doubt require a build-up of NATO troops to protect them,  particularly in light of a stepped-up and highly effective  Taliban campaign to intimidate government officials who are  perceived as cooperating with the Western forces by  assassinating selected targets, including even low-level  bureaucrats. *Jim Lobe's blog on U. S.  foreign policy can be read at  http://www. ips. org/blog/jimlobe/. 