Gen.  Stanley A.  McChrystal confronts the spectre of a collapse  of U. S.  political support for the war in Afghanistan in coming  months comparable to the one that occurred in the Iraq War in  late 2006. On Thursday, McChrystal's message that his strategy will  weaken the Taliban in its heartland took its worst beating  thus far, when he admitted that the planned offensive in  Kandahar City and surrounding districts is being delayed  until September at the earliest, because it does not have  the support of the Kandahar population and leadership.  Equally damaging to the credibility of McChrystal's strategy  was the Washington Post report published Thursday  documenting in depth the failure of February's offensive in  Marja.  The basic theme underlined in both stories - that the Afghan  population in the Taliban heartland is not cooperating with  U. S.  and NATO forces - is likely to be repeated over and  over again in media coverage in the coming months.  The Kandahar operation, which McChrystal's staff has touted  as the pivotal campaign of the war, had previously been  announced as beginning in June.  But it is now clear that  McChrystal has understood for weeks that the most basic  premise of the operation turned out to be false. 'When you go to protect people, the people have to want you  to protect them,' said McChrystal, who was in London for a  NATO conference.  He didn't have to spell out the obvious implication: the  people of Kandahar don't want the protection of foreign  troops.  The Washington Post story on McChrystal's announcement  reported 'U. S.  officials' had complained that 'the support  from Kandaharis that the United States was counting on  [Afghan President Hamid] Karzai to deliver has not  materialised. 'That explanation hardly makes McChrystal's war plan more  credible, because Karzai has made no secret of his  preference for a negotiated settlement rather than continued  efforts to weaken the Taliban by occupying key Taliban  strongholds.  The report in the Post, written by National Editor Rajiv  Chandrasekaran, provided the first detailed evidence of the  systematic non-cooperation of the population of the  district-sized area called Marja with U. S.  troops.  Chandrasekaran reported that female U. S.  Marines tried to  get Afghan women to come to a meeting last week, but that  not a single woman showed up.  And despite a NATO offer to  hire as many as 10,000 residents for labour projects on  irrigation projects, only about 1,200 have signed up. The U. S.  officials in Marja are trying to convince local  residents, in effect, that they should trust the foreign  troops to protect them from the Taliban, but the Taliban are  still able to threaten to credibly to punish those who  collaborate with occupation forces.  About a dozen people have been killed for such collaboration  already, and many more have been warned to stop, according  to Chandrasekaran's report.  'You can't get beyond security when you talk to people,' a  civilian official working on development told the Post  editor.  'They don't want to entertain discussions about  projects. ' Chandrasekaran also reported that representatives of rural  development and education projects came to Marja initially  and then retreated to the province centre.  They appear to be  as convinced as the population that the Taliban will  continue to be a powerful presence in the region. That was not supposed to happen when the U. S. -NATO declared  victory in Marja three months ago.  To ensure that no Taliban  would be able to operate in the area, McChrystal had  deployed nearly 15,000 U. S. , British and Afghan troops to  control Marja's population. Despite news media references before and during the  offensive to Marja as a 'city of 80,000', it was an  agricultural area whose population of about 35,000 was  spread over some 120 square kilometres, based on the fewer  than 50 dwellings shown on the Google Earth map of a 1. 2  kilometre segment of the area.  That means the 15,000 NATO and Afghan troops provide a ratio  of one occupying soldier for every two members of the  population.  Counterinsurgency doctrine normally calls for  one soldier for every 50 people in the target area.  The fact that the U. S. -NATO forces could not clear the  Taliban from Marja despite such an unusually heavy  concentration of troops is devastating evidence that the  McChrystal strategy has failed.  Throughout 2009, media coverage of the war was focused on  plans for a new offensive strategy that promised to turn the  war around.  But Thursday's double dose of bad news suggests  a cascade of news stories to come that will reinforce the  conclusion that the war is futile.  That in turn could lead to what might be an 'Iraq 2006  moment' — the swift unraveling of political support for the  war on the part of the elected and unelected political  elite, as occurred in the Iraq War in the second half of  2006.  The collapse of elite political support for the Iraq  War followed months of coverage of sectarian violence  showing the U. S.  military had lost control of the war.  McChrystal is still hoping, however, to be given much more  time to change the attitudes of the population in Helmand  and Kandahar.  Chandrasekaran quoted 'a senior U. S.  military official in  Afghanistan' - the term often used for McChrystal himself -  as saying, 'We're on an Afghan timetable, and the Afghan  timetable is not the American timetable. ' The official  added, 'And that is the crux of the problem. ' McChrystal and his boss, CENTCOM chief Gen.  David Petraeus,  may now be counting on pressure from the Republican Party to  force President Barack Obama to reverse his present position  that withdrawal of U. S.  troops will begin next year.  That was the view expressed Thursday by retired Army  lieutenant colonel and former Petraeus aide John Nagl, a  leading specialist on counterinsurgency who is now president  of the Centre for a New American Security. After the organisation's annual conference, Nagle told IPS  that Obama will have to shift policy next year to give more  time to McChrystal, because he would otherwise be too  vulnerable to Republican attacks on his Afghanistan policy  going into the 2012 election campaign.  *Gareth Porter is an investigative historian and journalist  specialising in U. S.  national security policy.  The paperback  edition of his latest book, 'Perils of Dominance: Imbalance  of Power and the Road to War in Vietnam', was published in  2006. 