With thousands of war affected civilians still without livelihood and an economy  still reeling from the aftermath of a decades-long conflict in Sri Lanka’s  northern region, plans should be in place to revive local economies and jobs,  says a top United Nations official. 'There needs to be a strategic plan to bring in industries, infrastructure  development, investments and jobs into these areas devastated by war,'  Kandeh Yumkella, director general of the U. N.  Industrial Development  Organisation (UNIDO), told IPS during his visit to the South Asian country last  week. UNIDO is a specialised agency of the U. N.  mandated to promote sustainable  industrial development. 'All the agencies and government bodies involved in developing and assisting  the war affected region have understood how important this is.  I am  confident that it will be in place.  We don’t have much time — this has to begin  now,' Yumkella assures.  Yumkella, who hails from Sierra Leone, says the experience of his own  country in West Africa, which was devastated by an 11-year civil strife that  ended in 2002, has shown the vital role economic empowerment plays in  post-conflict recovery. Generating much needed income for Sri Lanka’s war ravaged northern region  is now an integral part of the recovery programme being spearheaded by the  government and donor states, says Yumkella, who met last week with high- ranking government officials, including Prime Minister D.  M.  Jayarathna, to  discuss the potential industrialisation of northern Sri Lanka.  A bloody civil conflict with the separatist Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam  (LTTE) has left the north devastated and devoid of any major industries or  investments.  The conflict ended in May 2009, when the LTTE, who had fought  for an independent state for the island’s minority Tamils, were defeated by  government forces.  The war cost the country over 70,000 lives, billions of  dollars in damages and lost economic opportunities. The last phase of the war forced over 280,000 to flee their homes and end up  in welfare camps.  Since late last year, tens of thousands of the displaced  civilians have returned to their homes.  According to the latest available data from the U. N.  over 214,000 civilians  have either returned to their homes or are living with host families.  Around  76,000 still remain in the camps set up for the displaced.  The government  said it plans to resettle them by August this year.  UNIDO is already assisting a livelihoods recovery programme in the north and  east of Sri Lanka, funded by a two million U. S.  dollar grant from Japan, says  Yumkella.  He also says his agency would begin a new assistance programme  to provide jobs to at least 40,000 war widows in the country’s conflict-torn  region.  'We have to make these areas attractive for private investments, give hope to  the younger generation, the widows, the child soldiers,' says Yumkella.  'The  next two years will be very important. ' Yumkella warns that if income generation opportunities do not increase in the  former conflict zone, frustrations are likely to intensify.  'We have to work  really hard in the next five years to fulfil the hopes in these people who have  survived so much,' he declares. War affected individuals who have returned to their homes share Yumkella’s  view that jobs are crucial in the erstwhile war zone. Nagarangan Kalaiamuda, 27, is desperate for any kind of work.  A native of  Puliyankulam, just south of Kilinochchi town, the former administrative hub of  the Tigers, Kalaiamuda, she lives in a 10-by-5-foot mud hut with her two  young children.  Her husband is in government custody for suspected links  with the Tigers.  'I find some kind of work, like helping a family that has just returned home or  helping an (aid) agency with some work.  But I don’t have any permanent  work,' she told IPS.  She makes about 200 Sri Lankan rupees (about 1. 76  dollars) a day when she finds work.  But this means she must leave her two  children with her neighbours, who are war returnees like her.  Each returning family gets 25,000 rupees (220 dollars) from the U. N.  High  Commissioner for Refugees and food rations for six months from the World  Food Programme.  'The assistance helps, but without jobs, we will not be able to build our  houses or do other things that are essential,' Kalaiamuda says.  Anton Gunadayalan, a local official, fears income generation would take  sometime.  'People have just started to come back; it will take some time for  things to revert to normal,' he says.  Gunadayalan, who is in charge of issuing construction permits in the  Puliyankulam area, adds that when the reconstruction of houses and other  buildings begins, there could be more employment opportunities.  'There are  no houses standing, so we have to rebuild everything — that is a lot of work,'  he says. The U. N.  estimates that at least 160,000 houses need to be rebuilt in the  former war zone commonly known as the Vanni.   Economists have observed that one other possible way to jumpstart the Vanni  economy is to revitalise agriculture and fisheries, which accounted for over 30  percent of the pre-war regional economy.  Economist Muttukrishna Sarvananthan, who runs the Point Pedro  Development Institute, a non-governmental social research outfit based in  the northern Jaffna peninsula, believes it is not aid but private investments  that can rejuvenate the Vanni economy.  'What Sri Lanka requires is not a ‘Marshall Plan’ of any sort.  Instead, what we  require is entrepreneurial capitalism.  Enterprises of modest scale, as opposed  to donor or government funded grandiose projects, could contribute to  substantive and enduring growth,' he says.  