The timing of the publication of a major New York Times story  on the vast untapped mineral wealth that lies beneath  Afghanistan's soil is raising major questions about the intent  of the Pentagon, which released the information. Given the increasingly negative news that has come out of  Afghanistan - and of U. S.  strategy there - some analysts  believe the front-page article is designed to reverse  growing public sentiment that the war is not worth the cost. 'What better way to remind people about the country's  potential bright future - and by people I mean the Chinese,  the Russians, the Pakistanis, and the Americans - than by  publicising or re-publicising valid (but already public)  information about the region's potential wealth?' wrote Marc  AmBinder, the political editor of 'The Atlantic' magazine,  on his blog. 'The way in which the story was presented - with on-the- record quotations from the Commander in Chief of CENTCOM  [Gen.  David Petraeus], no less - and the weird promotion of  a Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense to Undersecretary of  Defense [Paul Brinkley] suggest a broad and deliberate  information operation designed to influence public opinion  on the course of the war,' he added. The nearly 1,500-word article, based almost entirely on  Pentagon sources and featured as the lead story in Monday's  'Early Bird', a compilation of major national security  stories that the Pentagon distributes each morning, asserted  that Afghanistan may have close to one trillion dollars in  untapped mineral deposits.  These include 'huge veins of  iron, copper, cobalt, gold, and critical industrial metals  like lithium', the story said. Afghanistan's total annual gross domestic product (GDP) last  year came to about 13 billion dollars. One 'internal Pentagon memo' provided to the Times' author,  James Risen predicted that Afghanistan could become 'the  'Saudi Arabia of lithium,' a key raw material in the  manufacture of batteries for laptops and Blackberrys'. 'There is stunning potential here,' Petraeus told Risen in  an interview Saturday.  'There are a lot of ifs, of course,  but I think potentially it is hugely significant,' he said  of the conclusions of a study by a 'small team of Pentagon  officials and American geologists'. The government of Afghan President Hamid Karzai, whose  recent efforts to begin a reconciliation process with the  insurgent Taliban have been criticised by the Pentagon,  quickly seized on the report.  In a hastily arranged press briefing Monday, Karzai's  spokesman, Waheed Omar, said the report was 'the best news  we have had over many years in Afghanistan'. Other commentators, however, suggested the news about  Afghanistan's underground wealth was not all that new. As noted by Blake Hounshell, managing editor at 'Foreign  Policy' magazine, the U. S.  Geological Service (USGS) already  published a comprehensive inventory of Afghanistan's non-oil  mineral resources on the internet in 2007, as did the  British Geological Survey.  Much of their work was based on  explorations and surveys undertaken by the Soviet Union  during its occupation of Afghanistan during the 1980's. The nearly trillion-dollar figure is based on a simple  tabulation of the previous estimates for each mineral  according to its current market price, according to  Hounshell. So, the question for many observers was why the article,  which dominated much of the foreign news in the network and  cable broadcast media during Monday's news cycle, was  published now. Risen himself suggested an answer in his story, noting  'American and Afghan officials agreed to discuss the mineral  discoveries at a difficult moment in the war in  Afghanistan. 'Indeed, U. S.  and NATO casualties have risen sharply in  recent weeks; a four-month-old counterinsurgency offensive  to 'clear, hold, and build' in the strategic region around  Marja in Pashtun-dominated Helmand province appears to have  stalled badly; and a planned campaign in and around the  critical city of Kandahar has been delayed for at least two  months. The latest polling shows a noticeable erosion of support for  Washington's commitment to the war compared to eight months  ago, when President Barack Obama agreed to the Pentagon's  recommendations to send an additional 30,000 U. S.  troops to  Afghanistan to bring the total U. S.  military presence there  to around 100,000 later this summer.  Moreover, what little support for the war remains among the  publics of Washington's NATO allies - never as high as in  the U. S.  in any event - is also fading quickly.  NATO and  non-NATO countries, excluding the U. S. , currently have about  34,000 troops deployed to Afghanistan.  On the eve of a NATO ministerial conference in Brussels last  week, Secretary of Defence Robert Gates warned that  Washington and its NATO allies had very little time to  convince their publics that their strategy against the  Taliban was working - a message that has since been strongly  echoed the coalition's commander in Afghanistan, Gen.   Stanley McChrystal, and by Petraeus himself. Indeed, the administration is committed to a major review of  its strategy in Afghanistan at the end of the year, and  Obama himself has pledged to begin withdrawing U. S.  troops  in July 2011.  Obama is already coming under pressure from right-wing and  neo-conservative media - some of which have been cultivated  by Petraeus, in particular - and Republican lawmakers to  delay that date.  That view was seconded last week by former Petraeus aide,  Lt.  Col.  John Nagl (ret. ), a counterinsurgency specialist  who is now president of the influential Centre for a New  American Security.  Nagl worked closely with Petraeus in authoring the much- lauded 2006 U. S.  Counter-Insurgency Field Manual, which  stressed the importance of efforts to influence media  perceptions in any counterinsurgency campaign. 'The media directly influence the attitude of key audiences  toward counter-insurgents, their operations, and the  opposing insurgency,' they wrote.  'This situation creates a  war of perceptions between insurgents and counter-insurgents  conducted continuously using the news media. 'In that respect, the appearance of the Times story Monday  looked to many observers like part of an effort to  strengthen the case for giving the counterinsurgency effort  more time. In an interview with Politico's Laura Rozen Monday, former  Afghan finance minister Ashraf Ghani said he had  commissioned the assessment of Afghanistan's mineral wealth.   'As to why it came out today. . .  I cannot explain,' he said. *Jim Lobe's blog on U. S.  foreign policy can be read at  http://www. ips. org/blog/jimlobe/. 