Should private contractors like Blackwater be allowed to  continue to provide armed security for convoys, diplomatic and  other personnel, and military bases and other facilities in  Afghanistan and Iraq? A bipartisan U. S.  Congressional  commission will spend two days cross-examining 14 witnesses  from academia, government and the companies themselves to come  up with an answer. 'Some security tasks are so closely tied to government  responsibilities, so mission-critical, or so risky that they  shouldn't be contracted out at all,' says Christopher Shays,  a former Republican member of Congress from Connecticut. Shays is the co-chair of the Commission on Wartime  Contracting (CWC), a body created in early 2008 to  investigate waste, fraud and abuse in military contracting  services in Afghanistan and Iraq. The commission is expected to reveal results from a seven  day fact-finding trip to Iraq last month in which spot  checks on four military bases turned up a contracting  company hired to protect a military base that had not been  vetted even though they had dispatched hundreds of  employees.  At another base, individual security guards were  identified who had not undergone proper background checks. The thorny question of what is 'inherently governmental' and  what can be turned over to contractors was singled out for  attention by President Barack Obama in March 2009, when he  ordered the Office of Federal Procurement Policy (OFPP), a  department within the White House's Office of Management and  Budget, to come up with an answer. By some estimates as many as half the staff members at U. S.   government civilian agencies are temporary and even long- term specialists from the private sector, a trend that  accelerated in the last decade.  For example, a controversial  programme known as A-76, begun by the administration of  former President George W.  Bush, forced selected government  agencies to prove that they were more efficient than the  private sector or 'outsource' the work. The Pentagon caught the outsourcing bug when former defence  secretary Donald Rumsfeld ordered that the invasion of Iraq  in March 2003 be conducted with no more than 150,000 troops.   Almost by default, the military turned over as much as it  possibly could to private contractors, with little guidance  on how to do so. Today, every U. S soldier deployed to Afghanistan and Iraq is  matched by at least one civilian working for a private  company.  All told some 239,451 contractors work for the  Pentagon in battle zones around the world - of which roughly  one in five is a U. S.  citizen, two out of five are from the  country at war and the remaining workers are from third  countries, according to a census taken by the Pentagon's  Central Command in the first quarter of 2010. While this workforce is mostly made up of legions of low  paid workers from South and Southeast Asia who do menial  tasks like cooking and cleaning up after the troops, the  protection of senior diplomats and supply convoys as well as  military bases and reconstruction projects is also handled  by men (and a few women) with guns who work for private  companies with exotic names like Four Horseman and Blue  Hackle. All told the Commission on Wartime Contracting estimates  that 18,800 'private security contractors' work in Iraq and  some 23,700 in Afghanistan. Basic QuestionsThe Commission on Wartime Contracting public hearings on  Jun.  18 and 21 will attempt to take a step back and ask some  very basic questions about whether or not using private  armed security is a good idea at all or how it should be  done better. Some technical guidance has been forthcoming from the Obama  administration.  In late March 2010, Daniel Gordon, the head  of OFPP, issued a draft memo on 'inherently governmental  activities' that suggested applying a 'nature of the  function'' test to ask agencies to consider whether the  direct exercise of sovereign power is involved, i. e. ,  committing the government to a course of action. Michael Thibault, the other co-chair of the commission and a  former deputy director of the Defence Contract Audit Agency,  told Federal News Radio recently that part of the problem is  that the government has been hiring the 'lowest price  technically acceptable' contracting. Eventually, Thibault said contractors will 'get up to speed  but it's going to take a lot of time and it's silly.  Why  would you do that? And should they be doing that?'Others say that the problem is lack of proper regulation.   'Armed private security contractors always pose some risk to  civilians but factors that increase risk such as a more  dangerous environment, jobs that require movement, and poor  oversight make the use of private security more suspect,'  Dr.  Deborah Avant, a professor of political science at the  University of California (Irvine), and author of 'Private  Security: The Market for Force', told IPS. Avant will be one of the six witnesses who will testify  before the commission on Friday together with Dr.  Allison  Stanger, professor of international politics and economics  at Middlebury College, Vermont, and author of 'One Nation  Under Contract'. In a recent publication for the Washington, DC-based Centre  for a New American Security, Stanger wrote: 'We do not need  in-sourcing; we need smart-sourcing that can restore proper  government oversight while harnessing the energy and  initiative of the private sector for the public good. 'Also testifying will be John Nagl, a retired U. S.  Army  officer who is best known for his book 'Learning to Eat Soup  with a Knife: Counterinsurgency Lessons from Malaya and  Vietnam'. Non-governmental expert Danielle Brian, executive director  of the Project on Government Oversight and two former  government officials who now work in private industry have  also been invited to testify: Allan Burman, the former  administrator of OFPP who is now president of the Jefferson  Solutions consulting firm and Stan Soloway, former U. S.   deputy under-secretary of defence for acquisition reform,  who is now president of the Professional Services Council,  an industry lobby group. On Jun.  21, the Commission on Wartime Contracting will hear  from government officials on the same subject as well as  representatives of four companies: DynCorp International,  Aegis Defence Services, Triple Canopy; and Torres Advanced  Enterprise Solutions. *This article was produced in partnership with CorpWatch -  www. corpwatch. org. 