Thirty-five years after the end of the Vietnam War, a joint  U. S. -Vietnamese panel endorsed a 10-year, 300-million-dollar  'plan of action' to deal with the deadly health and  environmental legacy of the U. S.  military's widespread use of  'Agent Orange' during the conflict. The U. S.  government, according to the panel, should provide  most of the assistance, which would be designed both to  clean up more than two dozen sites in southern Vietnam where  contamination was particularly severe and to expand health  and related care to people affected by Agent Orange and  other dioxin-based herbicides. 'We are talking about something that is a major legacy of  the Vietnam War and a major irritant in this important  relationship,' said Walter Isaacson, co-chair of the  binational group and president of the Aspen Institute, which  released the plan of action. 'The cleanup of our mess from the Vietnam War will be far  less costly than the Gulf oil spill that BP will have to  clean up (in the Gulf of Mexico),' he added. The plan, the result of three years of consultations by the  Aspen-sponsored and Ford Foundation-funded U. S. -Vietnam  Dialogue Group on Agent Orange/Dioxin, comes at a key moment  in the rapprochement between Washington and Hanoi, which  established full diplomatic relations only in 1995. Bilateral trade has grown steadily since even before that  date, reaching more than 15 billion dollars last year.  The two former enemies have also steadily improved their  military ties.  For the first time since the war, a U. S.  Navy  supply ship underwent extensive repairs at Cam Ranh Bay,  which once served as Washington's most important deep-water  port in what was then South Vietnam, and Pentagon officials  have made little secret of their wish for a comprehensive  agreement that would ensure regular access to it. But, as noted by Isaacson, the legacy of Agent Orange - and  Washington's failure to provide substantial assistance to  Hanoi in dealing with it - has long been a sore point in  bilateral ties, particularly as Washington has been  reluctant to assume responsibility.  Last year, the U. S.  Supreme Court ended a five-year court  battle by refusing to hear an appeal by Vietnamese  plaintiffs from judgements by lower courts that the main  producers of the chemicals, Dow Chemical and Monsanto, could  not be held liable for birth defects allegedly caused by  exposure to Agent Orange.  'Questions of responsibility, awareness and data reliability  have for too long generated bitter controversy and stalled  research and remedial action,' the group, which includes  private citizens, scientists and policy-makers from both  countries, said in its report.  'The time to hesitate is  past. 'Between 1962 and 1971, when Washington halted their use, the  U. S.  military sprayed nearly 76 million litres of Agent  Orange and related herbicides across South Vietnam and in  border areas of Cambodia and Laos as part of an effort to  deny Viet Cong insurgents and North Vietnamese troops dense  jungle cover and food. These herbicides destroyed a total of about two million  hectares of forest - roughly the same area as El Salvador -  and another 200,000 hectares of farmland, according to a  report released with the plan of action.  Moreover, Agent  Orange and related dioxins were sprayed at up to 50 times  the concentration recommended by the manufacturers for  killing plants. Nearly five million Vietnamese living in those areas, as  well as some 2. 8 million U. S.  military personnel deployed  there during the war, may have been exposed to the chemicals  which have been linked by the U. S.  Institute of Medicine to  various cancers, diabetes, nerve and heart disease, and  birth defects.  In addition, as a persistent organic pollutant (POP), dioxin  is very slow to degrade in the environment so that its toxic  effects can literally last generations. According to the Red Cross, an estimated three million  Vietnamese have suffered adverse health effects from  exposure to Agent Orange and related herbicides, including  some 150,000 children born with serious birth defects, such  as spina bifida.  While U. S.  researchers have been studying the effects of  Agent Orange/dioxin in Vietnam for some 25 years, the two  countries convened their first official scientific  conference on the subject only in 2002.  Since 2007, the U. S.  Congress has appropriated nine million  dollars for 'environmental remediation of dioxin- contaminated sites and related health activities in Vietnam'  of which a little over four million dollars has been spent. Congress is currently considering an additional 12 million  dollars in assistance for fiscal year 2011. By contrast, the U. S.  Veterans Administration (VA) last year  alone paid out nearly two billion dollars to Vietnam  veterans whose current ailments are believed to be tied to  exposure to dioxins.  Most U. S.  aid to deal with the Agent Orange problem has come  from private sources.  The Ford Foundation, the bi-national  group's primary funder, has provided nearly 12 million  dollars in grants for environmental restoration and  treatment of Vietnamese victims, as well as for efforts to  educate the U. S.  public about the issue. The plan of action calls for spending 100 million dollars on  cleaning up specific dioxin 'hot spots' around southern  Vietnam where soil and lakes are most contaminated and 200  million dollars for expanding health and related services  for individuals with disabilities resulting from exposure. The most serious contamination is found in airports and  former U. S.  military bases where the dioxins were off- loaded, handled, and stored.  Soil tests conducted in 2007 by a Canadian firm in and  around Da Nang's airport, which served as Washington's  largest air base during the war, found that dioxin levels  there were 300 to 400 times higher than international  limits. Breast milk and blood samples from people who previously  lived near the airport, which is now a major tourist  destination, found the highest dioxin levels ever recorded  in Vietnam, more than 100 times international limits,  according to the report. Asked about the report's recommendations, State Department  spokeseman P. J.  Crowley praised the group's work, adding,  'We have great interest in (its) strategic plan and will  look forward to reviewing the details. '*Jim Lobe's blog on U. S.  foreign policy can be read at  http://www. ips. org/blog/jimlobe/. 