In early May, Gen.  David Petraeus, head of U. S.  Central  Command, was awarded the American Enterprise Institute's  Irving Kristol Award, which is given to individuals who have  'made exceptional intellectual or practical contributions to  improved government policy, social welfare, or political  understanding'. During his acceptance speech, titled 'The Surge of Ideas',  Petraeus lauded a number of neoconservative 'scholars'  associated with AEI, in particular 'Team Kagan', for their  work in preparing the intellectual ground work that led to  the 'surge' in Iraq.  He said, 'In the fall of 2006, AEI scholars helped develop  the concept for what came to be known as the surge.  Fred and  Kim Kagan and their team, which included retired general  Jack Keane, prepared a report that made the case for  additional troops in Iraq.  As all here know, it became one  of those rare think tank products that had a truly strategic  impact. 'Three months earlier, in January, Petraeus offered a very  similar speech about the 'surge of ideas' during a talked  organised by Kim Kagan's Institute for the Study of War  (ISW), a 'non-partisan, non-profit, public policy research  organisation [that] advances an informed understanding of  military affairs through reliable research, trusted  analysis, and innovative education. ' During his ISW presentation, which was devoted largely to  discussing U. S.  military priorities in the greater Middle  East, Petraeus argued that 'far more important than the  surge of 30,000 additional U. S.  troops was the surge of  ideas that helped us to employ those troops. ' He said that a  number of think tank 'heroes' like 'Fred' and 'Kim' were  responsible for developing a 'study and analysis that did  indeed have a strategic impact unlike that of any other  study or analysis that I can think of'. Petraeus was referring to 'Choosing Victory: A Plan for  Success in Iraq', a study sponsored by the AEI and led by  Fred Kagan and retired Gen.  Jack Keane (an ISW board  member), with Kim Kagan and a host of AEI scholars serving  as advisers.  The group's report, released in early 2007,  played an instrumental role in shaping the surge and  building public support for it.  Petraeus extolled his think tank 'heroes' for providing 'the  rationale for the additional forces that were required [and]  describ[ing] how they might be used in Iraq', claiming that  their work 'serendipitously' made its way into 'the West  Wing and ultimately even into the Oval Office.  …I think it  played a very significant role in helping to shape the  intellectual concepts and indeed, in helping to shape the  ultimate policy decision that was made. ' Petraeus's 'surge of ideas' speech highlights an issue that  has drawn increasing attention and criticism from  commentators and foreign policy experts.  In recent years,  there has been a tendency for like-minded think tanks and  military officers to jointly pursue policy objectives,  sometimes in opposition to the stated preferences of the  administration. According to some observers, this trend raises questions  about the appropriate role of both military officers, who  are part of a chain of command, and think tanks, which  present themselves as 'non-partisan' appraisers of public  policy. The Iraq surge public relations campaign is often  highlighted as a case in point.  Commenting on this case,  Brian Katulis, a fellow at the liberal Centre for American  Progress, argues that when military officers get involved in  policy advocacy, it can have a 'narrowing effect' on debate.  Katulis points to Petraeus's support for the work of Michael  O'Hanlon and Kenneth Pollack of the centrist Brookings  Institution.  In a July 2007 article for the New York Times  titled 'A War We Might Just Win' - a 'propaganda piece',  says Katulis - the two analysts cited their military- sponsored tour in Iraq to claim that, as a result of the  surge, 'morale was high', the bad guys were on the run, and  while the situation remained 'grave', the military  escalation merited continued congressional support.  Exactly the message, says Katulis, that Petraeus hoped to  transmit.  Bernard Finel, a fellow at the American Security Project in  Washington, agrees, arguing that Petraeus's decision to give  a 'window shield' tour to analysts like O'Hanlon was  patently deliberate.  During the months before his Iraq tour,  O'Hanlon had helped promote the surge ideas pushed by the  Kagans, coauthoring a paper with Fred Kagan and inviting him  to talk at a Brookings event.  'Petraeus knew that the Bush administration's credibility  was low, that it was going to have trouble selling the  surge,' said Finel in an interview, so he hand-picked a  number of civilians who he knew were behind this policy and  helped turn them into media 'experts'.  This effort sidelined  critics of the surge, says Finel, who were viewed as  'outsiders, people without access, and thus not to be  believed'. Just as importantly, say writers like Foreign Policy's Laura  Rozen, the successful effort to promote the Iraq surge  appears to have had an impact on Petraeus, who realised the  persuasive power of getting 'influence makers' to present  situations on the ground 'from the command's perspective'. Wrote Rozen last year, 'It's a lesson perhaps from the  Petraeus team's famous counterinsurgency doctrine: In the  campaign to win hearts and minds, don't forget the home  front. 'This 'Petreaus Model' was updated late last year by Gen.   Stanley McChrystal, head of U. S.  forces in Afghanistan.   During much of 2009, in an effort to overcome resistance  from the Obama administration and push through his preferred  war plan, McChrystal waged a public relations campaign that  relied in part on a 'strategic assessment' team made up of  several policy wonks whose views happened to be largely in  line with his own. Team members included the omnipresent Kagans, Stephen Biddle  of the Council on Foreign Relations, Anthony Cordesman of  the Centre for Strategic and International Studies, Andrew  Exum of the Centre for a New American Security (CNAS), and  Jeremy Shapiro of the Brookings Institution.  Some of these civilian experts - as well as several  additional high-profile wonks like O'Hanlon, who has a knack  for getting invited by the U. S.  military to visit conflict  zones - began appearing in the media promoting ideas largely  in line with McChrystal's, defending his decision to  publicly contradict the administration in a speech, or  pushing an optimistic view of the Afghan situation.  Meanwhile, by late 2009, think tanks like CNAS and ISW had  begun holding a series of events featuring military brass  discussing progress in counterinsurgency campaigns.  In  September 2009, for example, several CNAS scholars joined  Gen.  Petraeus at a National Press Club event entitled  'Counterinsurgency Leadership in Afghanistan, Iraq, and  Beyond', which 'explored ways to improve counterinsurgency  leadership, with particular attention to the leaders of  American, Afghan, and Iraqi forces. ' Comments Finel, 'When people like McChrystal and Petraeus  come out and argue for controversial polices, they turn the  debate into one of patriotism and not policy.  It is no  longer a debate about the merits of the policy, but about  how much respect you have for the military. '*Michael Flynn is the director of IPS Right Web and the lead  researcher of the Global Detention Project at the Graduate  Institute of International and Development Studies in  Geneva.  This is the first of a two-part series on the  relationship between think tanks and the U. S.  military. 