Individuals and armed groups that are considered repeat  offenders in the recruitment and use of child soldiers may  soon be subject to United Nations sanctions. 'They are moving toward using the existing sanctions  committees to deal with sanctions against these persistent  violators,' said Radhika Coomaraswamy, special  representative of the secretary-general on children and  armed conflict, at a press briefing following an open debate  at the Security Council on Wednesday. A presidential statement issued by Mexican Ambassador Claude  Heller expressed the Council's 'readiness to adopt targeted  and graduated measures against persistent perpetrators'. Sanctions against groups in the Democratic Republic of Congo  'might move ahead, that seems to be the sanctions committee  most active on this issue', Coomaraswamy told IPS. Among the persistent violators identified by the U. N.  are 16  insurgent groups from countries that include the  Philippines, Colombia, Sudan, and the DRC.  These non-state  actors have an opportunity to be de-listed if they enter  into action plans with the United Nations. The Moro Islamic Liberation Front, Sudan People's Liberation  Army, and the Unified Communist Party of Nepal-Maoist have  signed onto these agreements.  The action plan facilitates  the release and the rehabilitation of children in armed  conflict. The tactic of 'naming and shaming' and the threat of  sanctions are aimed at convincing parties to enter into and  comply with the action plan.  Groups seeking legitimacy  internationally and those that hope for a national  leadership role often choose this avenue, like the Uganda  People's Defence Force (UPDF) which was de-listed last year.   Still, the endemic use of children in armed conflict  persists, especially in Somalia. Within countries implementing the Monitoring and Reporting  Mechanism (MRM), over 9,500 children have been removed from  armed groups.  This number excludes the 3,000 people  recruited as minors released in Nepal just last January and  February. Breakthroughs have also been made with the addition of two  triggers for listing grave violations such as sexual  violence and the killing and maiming of children. No accurate figures on child soldiers or children associated  with insurgent groups exist because the MRM captures the  situation only in areas covered by the Security Council.   Tracking global trends is even more difficult with the lack  of documentation on recruitment, said Hilde Johnson,  UNICEF's deputy executive director. There have been situations where children were released en  masse as part of peace agreements.  But Coomaraswamy told IPS  that, 'We prefer the action plan route - that means children  come to us and we can help them in reintegration and  rehabilitation. ' Otherwise, children are not under the framework for  rehabilitation programmes and follow-up activities, she  noted. The road to reintegration into the community is more  difficult for women who are recruited as soldiers and who  may have killed people in the village.  'Society has a hard  time dealing with them, especially in Nepal, where women are  supposed to be docile,' Coomaraswamy explained. Manju Gurung, a former Nepalese child soldier, spoke before  the Security Council Wednesday on the difficulties of  community reintegration.  'In the village, everyone continued  to show suspicion towards me and to talk behind my back,'  she said. At age 13, Gurung was forced to join the Maoist guerrilla  army under the 'One Family, One Member' campaign.  Five years  later, she is continuing her education and has had  assistance in forming a group to advocate for the rights of  children and HIV issues. The last group of Maoist child soldiers was discharged in  February, but the secretary-general's recent report on Nepal  noted the importance of monitoring the activities of youth  groups that recruit children for involvement in violent  protests.  These groups, affiliated with political parties  and movements, continue to proliferate, it said. Youth wings affiliated with political movements and groups  that engage in violent protests are not subject to the same  protocol as insurgent groups that misuse children for their  political agenda. 'This is more of a grey area…we are not opposed to children  having political opinions, taking part in political  activities,' Coomaraswamy said. The situation is being monitored by her office and UNICEF  and the approach may be revisited if these groups devolve  into situations of violence.  