There has been a growing tendency in recent years for think  tanks and military brass to jointly pursue policy objectives,  some of which are opposed by the public or the White House. Recent examples have included the campaigns to promote troop  'surges' in Iraq (2007) and Afghanistan (2009).  Both of  these campaigns involved seemingly coordinated efforts by  generals and policy wonks to articulate to the public and  policy-makers why they should support costly military  policies in increasingly unpopular wars.    This trend in joint civilian-military public relations, say  critics, raises important questions about the appropriate  role of the military in promoting particular policies and  whether there is enough transparency and accountability in  the work of policy groups.  It is a time-honoured tradition, especially - though not  exclusively - on the political right, for think tanks to  pack their advisory boards with retired officers (many of  whom also segue into defense industry jobs after leaving the  military), who despite their apparent conflicts of interest  provide an apparent sheen of seriousness and credibility. Examples include the Centre for Security Policy (CSP) and  the Jewish Institute for National Security Affairs, two  neoconservative organisations whose boards are chock-a-block  with defence industry executives and retired military brass.  In addition, as the New York Times reported in 2008, some of  these retired officers -like Maj.  Gen.  Paul Vallely, a CSP  advisor, and Gen.  Barry McCaffery, a board member of the  defunct Committee for the Liberation of Iraq - have  developed reputations as 'impartial' experts, appearing on  TV news programmes while surreptitiously receiving talking  points from the Pentagon. There have also been cases in the past where generals  shunned the chain of command to promote tactics and  strategies that were opposed by the White House or Congress  - for instance, Gen.  Douglas MacArthur's criticism of  President Harry Truman's limited war strategy during the  Korean War and, more recently, Supreme Allied Commander Gen.   Wesley Clark's advocacy for direct U. S.  military involvement  in the Kosovo conflict.  However, say observers, the Afghanistan and Iraq public  relations campaigns represent a troubling new trend in  efforts by military officers to actively court (or co-opt)  organisations - both on the right (for example, the American  Enterprise Institute) and the centre (Centre for a New  American Security) - in an effort to shape public policy. One source interviewed for this article, a Washington-based  foreign policy writer who asked to be quoted in background  so as not to jeopardise his relations in government and the  non-governmental policy community, claims that there has  been a 'structural shift' in civilian relations to the  Pentagon that to some extent was initiated by Democrats in  the late 1990s.  Concerned over poll numbers showing that the public did not  trust Democrats on national security and hoping to cure the  'allergy' many liberals had felt for the military since the  Vietnam War, some elements of the Democratic Party started  actively courting uniformed officers in various policy  venues, including at the Council on Foreign Relations, which  began a military fellows programme around that time.  As a result of this effort, says the Washington-based  writer, many Democrats 'became Pentagon huggers instead of  Pentagon reformers' (a mantle that was left to Republicans,  like the much maligned Donald Rumsfeld, to take up).  These civilian-military collaborations are not all negative,  he says, and they can include cooperation on a range of  issues, such as how to best address piracy and confront  North Korea.  The problem arises when the military is shown  too much deference.  It was out this milieu, he says, that  Democratic Party-aligned hawkish think tanks like the Centre  for a New American Security were born. Critics of this trend highlight two main problems.  On the  one hand, they say, military officers have an obligation not  to bias the policy process.  Says Bernard Finel of the  American Security Project, 'In an ideal world, this is a top  down situation - civilians make policy decisions, the  military implements them.  But the military has expertise, so  they should be involved in the decision-making process.   There needs to be some back and forth. ''The problem is where to draw line,' he noted.  'We reify  military figures when it comes to questions of war and  conflict, so they should be very careful how they impact the  process. 'Other critics highlight the actions of think tanks.  Says the  Washington-based foreign policy expert, 'The problem is that  the public thinks these organisations are there to pursue  the public good, to challenge public officials, not get co- opted by them. 'But when you see these groups parroting military arguments  to promote operations that involve a staggering amount of  resources, he says, it is difficult to argue that they are  fulfilling their self-defined roles, especially given the  current economic crisis.  Brian Katulis of the Centre for American Progress agrees,  highlighting the issue of money.  When these experts are  paraded on television pushing the military line based on  their tours of war zones, he says, the public 'doesn't  realise that these people were paid to go on these trips'. More importantly, he says, there needs to be more  'transparency and accountability with respect to how these  groups are financed' and what their supporters' financial  stakes are with respect to defence policies.  Adds Finel, 'Sure, anyone who has a financial stake in the  policies promoted by a think tank should be forced to  disclose its support.  But there will always be this  situation of using celebrities, big names, to generate  interest and, ultimately, to raise money.  Everyone does it,  on the left, the right, the centre, thinks tanks,  universities. ''The bigger question is how some groups and individuals game  the system, generate influence through connections to the  military or government, receive loads of money from  corporate sponsors, and then use these connections to become  enormously influential in the policy process,' he said.  'I  mean, who elected CNAS?'As next year's deadline to begin troop withdrawals from  Afghanistan approaches, questions about the legitimacy of  joint military-wonk policy campaigns will likely resurface. As IPS reported in mid-June, military leaders like Gen.   Stanley McChrystal and Gen.  David Petraeus may 'be counting  on pressure from the Republican Party to force President  Barack Obama to reverse his present position. ' John Nagl,  head of CNAS, said as much after his organisation's recent  annual conference, arguing that unless the president changes  policy to give Gen.  McChrystal more time he will be  vulnerable to partisan attacks during the 2012 election  campaign. *Michael Flynn is the director of IPS Right Web and the lead  researcher of the Global Detention Project at the Graduate  Institute of International and Development Studies in  Geneva.  This is the second of a two-part series on the  relationship between think tanks and the U. S.  military. 