Some of the world's weakest states are becoming ever more  fragile, according to the 2010 edition of the annual 'Failed  States Index' (FSI) released here Monday by Foreign Policy  magazine and the independent Fund for Peace (FFP). The new index, which covers events and data accumulated in  2009, found that 15 countries - eight more than in 2005 -  score more than 100 points out of a possible 120 points that  would indicate total state collapse. Ten of those countries - including seven of the top 10 - are  in sub-Saharan Africa.  The four others include Afghanistan,  Iraq, Pakistan, Haiti, and Yemen in that order. 'The cluster of countries that are pushing at the top are  getting more numerous, and those that are at the top,  although they may be hovering around the same rank, are  becoming more precarious,' said Fund president Pauline  Baker, who has overseen the FSI since it was first launched  five years ago. 'Collectively, the phenomenon of fragile states seems to be  intensifying,' she added, noting that the appearance year  after year of most of the same states in the index's top 15  demonstrates that state failure 'tends to be chronic and  self-perpetuating'. In the latest index, which covers events and data  accumulated in 2009, Somalia was named the world's weakest  state for the third year in a row, followed by its  neighbour, Chad, and Sudan, which may well break into two  parts if a referendum scheduled for early next year in the  southern part of the country is implemented.  Zimbabwe, which ranked second in last year's survey but  which formed a coalition government in February 2009, took  the fourth position, followed by the Democratic Republic of  Congo (DRC).  The other African states in the top 15 included Central  African Republic (8) and Guinea (9), Cote D'Ivoire (12),  Kenya (13), and the continent's most populous country by  far, Nigeria (14). However, three governments in whose stability the United  States has invested heavily over most of the past decade  were also included among the top 10 candidates for state  failure. Afghanistan and Iraq, where Washington has deployed tens of  thousands of troops and spent hundreds of billions of  dollars in military and economic aid to bolster their  governments over recent years, claimed the sixth and seventh  positions, respectively - a reversal of their standings in  the 2009 FSI.  And Pakistan, where the U. S.  has spent more than 11 billion  dollars - mostly on the country's military - over the past  decade ranked 10. Since the 9/11 al Qaeda attacks on New York and the  Pentagon, the problem of failed states has risen to the top  of the U. S.  foreign policy agenda, in large part because  transnational terrorist or criminal groups can thrive where  governments cannot control their territory or borders or  deliver basic services. 'Dealing with such fractured or failing states is, in many  ways, the main security challenge of our time,' Defence  Secretary Robert Gates warned in an article published last  month in the influential Foreign Affairs journal. While the administration of President George W.  Bush dealt  with the challenge primarily through military means,  President Barack Obama has stressed more, at least  rhetorically, the importance of social and economic  development. The index, which is used by, among others, private companies  and banks and international financial institutions to assess  political risk and make investment decisions, and by the  tourism industry to rate safety, is based on some 200  variables that are grouped into 12 social, economic and  political indicators, each of which is given a numerical  score.  It is designed to provide early warning to the  international community about states that are at risk of  failure or collapse. The 12 indicators include, among other variables, the  movement of refugees and internally displaced persons  (IDPs); evidence of demographic pressures and serious ethnic  or sectarian grievances; gaps between rich and poor;  economic growth or recession; performance of public  services; corruption; the human rights situation and rule of  law; and the intervention of other states or foreign non- state actors. For each indicator, countries are given a numerical score of  between one (for best performance) and 10 (for worst. ) The  index ranked a total of 177 countries this year. While much attention is paid to country rankings on the  index, scores are a more important measure of how close to  collapse a given state may be.  In the 2005 Index, Cote d'Ivoire, then in the throes of a  violent conflict before the mainly Christian south and the  predominantly Muslim north, had the highest score, at 106,  followed by the DRC (105. 3), Sudan (104. 1), and Iraq  (103. 2). The scores in the 2010 Index are significantly higher.   Somalia received 114. 3 points; Chad, 113. 3; Sudan, 111. 8;  Zimbabwe, 110. 2; DRC, (109. 9); Afghanistan, 109. 3; and Iraq,  107. 3.  Altogether, 27 countries scored over 95, almost twice as  many as the 14 who scored over 95 five years ago.  Thirty-seven countries scored over 90, the cut-off point for  what the FFP consider red or 'alert' status. In an interview with IPS, Baker stressed that the index was  not predictive but can be used prospectively 'in the sense  that, by looking at the trend line for each country going  back some years, you can determine what the direction is'. Indeed, Kyrgyzstan, which was wracked by unprecedented  ethnic violence over the past week, ranked 45th in the new  index with a score of 88. 4.  In the 2005 edition, the Central  Asian nation ranked 65th, with an 80. 4 score.  'With countries that are fragile, it's very hard to predict  what will be the spark that lights the fire,' said Baker. Among the trends that are of particular concern for  Washington - in addition to Afghanistan and Iraq - are two  of the world's most populous nations: Pakistan and Nigeria,  which is also a major energy producer. With a score of 89. 4, Pakistan ranked 34 in the 2005 index.   At number 10 for the 2010 edition, its score has risen  sharply, to 102. 5, although that marks an improvement over  its score last year of 104. 1. In 2005, Nigeria ranked 54 with an 84. 3 score.  At 100. 2, the  country now ranks 14.  A companion article to this year's  index warned that Nigeria could face a 'worst-case scenario'  that would include 'renewed insurgency in the Niger Delta,  more religious violence in the country's center, and - in  the most unlikely but still occasionally rumoured outcome -  a military coup'. 'Regardless, life for the average Nigeria is getting worse,  not better.  After years of just muddling through, even that  might no longer be an option for Nigeria. 'Another key U. S.  ally in a highly unstable region, Ethiopia,  has also seen a worrisome erosion in its stability as  measured by the index.  Its overall score has risen from 91. 1  to 98. 8 over the past five years and now ranks 17, up from  30 in 2005. *Jim Lobe's blog on U. S.  foreign policy can be read at  http://www. ips. org/blog/jimlobe/. 