Jerry Torres, CEO of Torres Advanced Enterprise Solutions, has  a motto: 'For Torres, failure is not an option. ' A former  member of the Green Berets, one of the elite U. S.  Army Special  Forces, he was awarded 'Executive of the Year' at the seventh  annual 'Greater Washington Government Contractor Awards' in  November 2009. On Monday, Torres, whose company provides translators and  armed security guards in Iraq, was invited to testify before  the Commission on Wartime Contracting (CWC), a body created  in early 2008 to investigate waste, fraud and abuse in  military contracting services in Afghanistan and Iraq. Torres was asked to testify about his failure to obtain the  required clearances for 'several hundred' Sierra Leonian  armed security guards that he had dispatched to protect  Forward Operating Base Shield, a U. S.  military base in  Baghdad, in January 2010. Torres didn't show up. An empty chair at the witness table was placed ready for him  together with a placard with his name on it next to those  for representatives of three other companies working in Iraq  - the London-based Aegis, and DynCorp and Triple Canopy,  both Virginia-based companies. 'This commission was going to ask him, under oath, why his  firm agreed in January to assume private security  responsibilities at FOB Shield with several hundred guards  that had not been properly vetted and approved,' said  Michael Thibault, one of the co-chairs of the commission and  a former deputy director of the Defence Contract Audit  Agency. 'This commission was also going to ask Mr.  Torres why he  personally flew to Iraq, to FOB Shield, and strongly  suggested that Torres AES be allowed to post the unapproved  guards, guards that would protect American troops, and then  to 'catch-up the approval process'. 'Instead, a lawyer informed the commission staff that Torres  was 'nervous about appearing'. The failure of a contractor to appear for an oversight  hearing into lapses was just one example that the use of  some 18,800 armed 'private security contractors' in Iraq and  another 23,700 in Afghanistan to protect convoys, diplomatic  and other personnel, and military bases and other facilities  in Afghanistan and Iraq was not working. Blackwater's new Afghan contractPerhaps the most famous private military contractor in  Afghanistan and Iraq - North Carolina-based Blackwater - was  not invited to sit at the witness table either, despite the  fact that the company had been the subject of several  investigations into misconduct. For example, in September 2007, security guards from North  Carolina-based Blackwater guards shot and killed 17 Iraqi  civilians in Baghdad's Nisour Square. Blackwater staff have also been accused of killing other  private security contractors - in December 2006, Andrew J.   Moonen, was accused of killing a security guard of the Iraqi  vice president, Adel Abdul Mahdi.  And as recently as May  2009, four Blackwater contractors were accused of killing an  Afghan on the Jalalabad road in Kabul. Members of the commission noted with astonishment that the  State Department had awarded Blackwater a 120-million-dollar  contract to guard U. S.  consulates in Heart and Mazar-i- Sharif in Afghanistan this past Friday. Asked to explain why Blackwater was awarded the contract,  Charlene R.  Lamb, deputy assistant secretary for  international programmes at the State Department, stated  that the competitors for the contract - DynCorp and Triple  Canopy - weren't as qualified. Yet Don Ryder of DynCorp and Ignacio Balderas of Triple  Canopy testified that they were both qualified and able to  do the contract.  The two men said that they would consider  lodging a formal protest at the State Department Tuesday  after a de-briefing with the government. The choice of Blackwater, which has been banned by the  government of Iraq, left the commissioners with little doubt  that the contract award system was flawed.  'What does it  take for poor contractual performance to result in contract  termination or non-award of future contracts?' wondered  Thibault. Inherently GovernmentalAt a previous hearing of the commission last week, John  Nagl, president of the Washington, DC-based Centre for a New  American Security, submitted a report on the subject that  explained why the government was turning to these companies:  'Simple math illuminates a major reason for the rise of  contractors: The U. S.  military simply is not large enough to  handle all of the missions assigned to it. 'Yet it appears that the government does not even have the  oversight capability to police the companies that it has  hired to fill the gap. Some witnesses and experts said that by definition this work  should not be handed out to private contractors in war zone. 'Private security contractors are authorised to use deadly  force to protect American lives in a war zone and to me if  anything is inherently governmental, it's that,' said  Commissioner Clark Kent Ervin, a former inspector general at  both the State Department and the Homeland Security  Department.  'We don't have a definitional problem, we have  an acknowledgement of reality problem. 'Non-governmental expert Danielle Brian, executive director  of the Project on Government Oversight (POGO), said: 'It has  become clear to POGO that the answer is yes, PSCs are  performing inherently governmental functions.  A number of  jobs that are not necessarily inherently governmental in  general become so when they are conducted in a combat zone.   Any operations that are critical to the success of the U. S.   government's mission in a combat zone must be controlled by  government personnel. '*This article was produced in partnership with CorpWatch -  www. corpwatch. org. 