A year and a half into the presidency of Barack Obama, any  hopes that he would usher in a dramatic rethinking of U. S.   foreign policy have been more or less definitively dashed. Notwithstanding the wild-eyed warnings of right-wing hawks  who see Obama as 'the first post-American president', with a  covert agenda that is part Saul Alinsky and part Frantz  Fanon, the president has so far proven himself to be have  little inclination to break with the past when it comes to  foreign policy. If the George W.  Bush administration introduced the U. S.   public to names like Guantanamo, Fallujah, and Blackwater,  it is in the Obama administration that counterparts like  Bagram, Waziristan and Predator have become ubiquitous. To be sure, this does not mean, as some disillusioned Obama  supporters have suggested, that Obama is 'no different' from  Bush - particularly if it is the assertive and unchastened  Bush of the first term that they have in mind - or from the  likely alternatives. While Obama's diplomacy with Iran, for instance, has been  largely uninspired - witness the great amount of energy  devoted to passing sanctions that are simultaneously  provocative and toothless - his administration has by all  indications been working actively to avoid an outright war.   This is more than one could say about the likely course  under a President McCain or Palin. Similarly, Obama has thus far caved in his confrontations  with Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu, but he has  at the very least demonstrated an awareness that Bush-style  blank-cheque support for Israel is untenable - as opposed to  his Republican opponents, many of whom seem to fully endorse  the Greater Israel ideology of the Israeli settler movement. But if Obama has refrained from the most egregious excesses  of his predecessor, he has nonetheless remained solidly  within the mainstream of what Andrew Bacevich has termed the  U. S.  'ideology of national security' that has reigned since  World War II.  Whether this sort of caution has been the  result of heartfelt belief or political constraints is  largely beside the point. The real question, however, is: should anyone be surprised?  Was there any cause to believe that an Obama presidency  would signal a major shift in U. S.  foreign policy, or did  Obama's progressive supporters simply pin hopes upon the  candidate that were unjustified by the evidence? On some issues, like detainee policy, President Obama has  certainly backpedaled on Candidate Obama's promises, but on  many others - most notably the escalation of the war in  Afghanistan - he has simply followed through on his stated  intentions. In 'The American Way of War: How Bush's Wars Became Obama's'  (Haymarket Books, 2010), Tom Engelhardt provides a clear- eyed examination of U. S.  foreign policy in the Bush and  Obama years, and details unsparingly how Obama has inherited  - and in many cases exacerbated - the ills of the Bush era. While Engelhardt does not address explicitly the question of  whether things had to be this way, he refuses throughout to  fall into the satisfying simplifications of personalised  analysis - to contrast Obama the Crusader riding into  Washington to change everything with Obama the Cynic  sacrificing principle for political expediency.  In doing so, he forces the reader to confront the likelihood  that the forces that have made U. S.  foreign policy what it  is run far deeper than mere personalities, and conversely  that changing the U. S. 's stance in the world will require  far more than simply voting the 'good guys' into power. Engelhardt is best known as the man behind TomDispatch. com,  the site that since the Sep.  11, 2001 attacks has hosted  some of the most trenchant criticism of U. S.  foreign policy  by analysts ranging from Bacevich on the right to Noam  Chomsky on the left.  His book collects some of his own  essays written for TomDispatch from 2004 to 2010. One striking feature of the book is how seamlessly it flows,  despite the fact that some of its contents were written in  the first Bush term while others were written only a few  months ago.  This, in itself, is one indication of how little  has changed. Engelhardt's earlier book, 'The End of Victory Culture', was  a perceptive analysis of the ways that U. S.  pop culture  shaped the triumphalist narrative of the Cold War; here,  too, he is especially good at demonstrating the ways that  culture and the mass media influence what might ordinarily  be considered the realms of high politics. The first chapter examines how the Sep.  11 attacks have  shaped the political landscape for the past decade in ways  both obvious and subtle, but also the ways in which the  attacks themselves found particular resonance with a  population that had long been psychologically preparing for  the apocalypse in film.  How different, Engelhardt asks, would the course of history  have been if neither World Trade Centre tower had fallen in  the attacks? Without the cinematic horror of the towers  falling, perhaps politicians would have felt less need to  respond with a full-blown 'global war on terror'. Or perhaps the public thirst for revenge would have been  slaked with the toppling of the Taliban, and the U. S.  would  not have proceeded to Iraq out of a perceived need to 'go  right into the heart of the Arab world and smash something'  in response (as Thomas Friedman put it). Later chapters examine the progressive 'garrisoning' of the  earth as the archipelago of U. S.  bases spreads across the  globe, the ways that the antiseptic and allegedly 'surgical'  nature of air power has moved the carnage of war out of the  sight and minds of the U. S.  public, and the mangling of  media language used to disguise the nature of the  counterinsurgency wars in Iraq and Afghanistan. The observation that one man's terrorist is another's  freedom fighter is by now a familiar one, but Engelhardt  marshals an impressive amount of evidence to reveal just how  far the twisting of language has gone. The pieces on air power and the drone war are particularly  good.  One extended analysis of a single August 2008 incident  in Azizabad, Afghanistan illustrates how a compliant media  has conspired with the military to discredit and downplay  reports of civilian casualties. (After initially claiming that 30 'Taliban militants' had  been killed in the incident after attacking coalition  forces, the military was ultimately forced - following weeks  of stonewalling and gradual backpedaling - to give credence  to reports that the real death toll consisted of 90  civilians, including 60 children. )And for all the talk of the 'lessons learned' from Vietnam,  Engelhardt expertly details how many of the features of the  U. S. 's current wars - from the debates over body counts to  the faddish embrace of counterinsurgency (COIN) doctrine as  universal panacea - are throwbacks to the Vietnam era. 'The American Way of War' is, all in all, a very depressing  read.  But for that very reason, it is an important book for  anyone hoping to understand how the U. S.  arrived at its  current predicament during the Bush years, and how it  remains in this predicament despite Obama's best efforts -  or perhaps because of them. 