Suffering through the atrocities of war affects people in  different ways.  Some become crippled by anger, others by fear.   Some become violent and want only revenge.  And some, like Rose  Mapendo, an inspiring survivor of the war and ethnic cleansing  in the Democratic Republic of Congo, come out with a strong  commitment to work for peace and reconciliation. 'One person alone cannot push an elephant, but many together  can,' she tells a group of Congolese women in the new  documentary, 'Pushing the Elephant', which screened in New  York as part of the Human Rights Watch International Film  Festival, running Jun.  10-24 at the Film Society of Lincoln  Centre's Walter Reade Theatre. Mapendo's husband was killed during the violence in the  Congo in the late 1990s, and she lived through harrowing  experiences in death camps with nine children, including a  pair of twins who were born, in the dark, in the camp.   Mapendo recalls that she couldn't even find a clean tool to  cut the umbilical cord. Mapendo's four-year-old daughter Nangabire, however, was  with her grandparents when the family was forced to flee,  separating her from her mother.  Filmmakers Beth Davenport and Elizabeth Mandel heard  Mapendo's story when they met a founder of Mapendo  International, an organisation that cares for at-risk  African refugees.  They learned that Mapendo, who had  resettled in the United States, would soon reunite with  Nangabire after 12 years.  Mandel says that the pair knew  they had found a story they had to tell and rushed to begin  filming in two weeks.  'I think Rose's message is very powerful,' Mandel told IPS,  'but part of what makes it so powerful is that it is coming  from Rose.  So frequently the people who are talking about  peace and reconciliation are people who are approaching it  from the outside. 'Mapendo has become an outspoken activist for peace in the  Congo and works to help other refugees in her new city of  Phoenix, Arizona.  The simultaneously harrowing and hopeful documentary follows  her work to help put women at the forefront of the  peacemaking process.  'Unite, even if your husbands are  fighting,' Mapendo tells Congolese women.  'Pushing the Elephant' also follows 16-year-old Nangabire's  acclimation to life in the United States with her big  family, and tells the story of the horrors of war in the  Congo and the difficult decisions Mapendo had to make to  ensure her family's survival. Davenport and Mandel, who have worked on eight previous  social issue documentaries, captured intimate scenes of  family life, high school, and Rose's activism over two and a  half years of filming.  'One of the things that we really aspire to is to try to  play as much of an observational role on set as possible,'  Davenport says.  'We just sort of let things happen. 'In these candid scenes, the audience is able to see  Nangabire try to follow her mother's advice to leave her  painful past behind.  'My mother teaches forgiveness because  it helped her,' she says in the film.  'And she is confident  it will help others. '   Though the many Mapendo children sometimes find it difficult  to part with their mother as she goes about her work, their  pride in her is evident as they see the effects she has on  others. 'For us, to be in the presence of someone who has such grace  and such integrity and such passion for her purpose makes  her cause impossible to ignore,' says Mandel.  She says that knowing Mapendo has made all who worked on the  film more conscious of forgiveness in their everyday lives.   'Rose makes everyone around her a better person. ' For Mandel and Davenport, completing 'Pushing the Elephant'  was only the beginning of an extensive audience engagement  campaign.  The film will be shown in festivals around the United  States, and taken to refugee camps in Africa.   The filmmakers are partnering, says Davenport, 'with  organisations that can use it to make a difference in  refugee resettlement, women's empowerment, peace and  reconciliation'.  'Pushing the Elephant' will also be broadcast on PBS's  Independent Lens in March 2011 as part of Independent  Television Service's Women's Empowerment Initiative. 