Defying a challenge by the government of Sri Lanka, U. N.   Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon Tuesday named a three-member  panel of experts to advise him on how he should proceed with  investigating violations of human rights and humanitarian law  during the concluding stages of that country's long-drawn-out  separatist war last May. 'The secretary-general has all the authority he needs to  name a panel of advisers,' U. N.  spokesperson Martin Nesirky  told reporters, without spelling out where the authority  originated. The Sri Lankan government repeatedly took the position the  U. N.  charter does not provide the secretary-general the  legitimate right to appoint a panel of experts to probe  human rights violations. The creation of the panel was also not authorised by the  Human Rights Council, the General Assembly or the Security  Council. Nesirky pointed out the panel is an 'advisory panel limited  to advising the secretary-general'. 'It is not a fact-finding or investigative body,' he added. Asked whether the experts would interview witnesses, Nesirky  said the panel has no plans to visit Sri Lanka - an act that  would require the consent of a strongly antagonistic  government. 'Whether the results of its work would be made public would  be at the secretary-general's discretion,' he added. The three members of the panel are Marzuki Darusman of  Indonesia as chair, along with Yasmin Sooka of South Africa  and Steven Ratner of the United States. The panel is expected to advise the secretary-general on  'implementing the commitment on human rights accountability'  made in a joint statement issued by Ban and Sri Lankan  President Mahinda Rajapaksa after the U. N.  chief visited the  island nation in May 2009. Rajapaksa, who scored an overwhelming victory in recent  elections, primarily on the strength of his military's  defeat of the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE), has  consistently denied charges of war crimes and violations of  humanitarian law. 'Our troops carried a gun in one hand and the human rights  charter in the other,' he said last week, claiming that the  military did not 'fire at a single civilian'. The United Nations, however, has said that an estimated  7,000 or more civilians were killed during the height of the  battle that continued for over three decades.  International  human rights groups have also accused the military of  executing LTTE rebels even as they surrendered. An unidentified Sri Lankan official was quoted as saying the  government was 'unhappy with the appointment of the panel'  which was 'unwarranted and uncalled for'. During a visit to the United Nations last month, Sri Lankan  Foreign Minister Gamini Lakshman Peiris said the appointment  of the panel would be 'unprecedented' - more so, he said,  because it lacks the blessings of the Security Council, the  General Assembly or the Human Rights Council. 'This is politically unacceptable to Sri Lanka,' Peiris told  IPS. He also said Sri Lanka has already appointed its own  commission of inquiry to investigate charges made against  the military. 'The appointment of a panel by the secretary-general at this  stage would be premature,' he warned last month. Nesirky told reporters Tuesday that in the secretary- general's view, the primary responsibility for investigating  what happened in Sri Lanka is with that country's  government. Responding to a question, he said that Marzuki also has a  role as special rapporteur dealing with human rights in the  Democratic People's Republic of Korea (DPRK). Still, Marzuki had made clear he has time to accomplish both  tasks. Asked about the funding for the panel, Nesirky said it would  be paid out of funds available to the secretary-general for  'unforeseen expenses'.  Marzuki is a former attorney general of Indonesia, a member  of the Indonesian National Commission on Human Rights and,  most recently, served as one of the three commissioners of  the U. N.  commission of inquiry into the assassination of  former Pakistani Prime Minister Benazir Bhutto.  Sooka is the executive director of the Foundation for Human  Rights in South Africa and served as a commissioner on the  South African Truth and Reconciliation Commission, and as an  international commissioner on the Sierra Leone Truth and  Reconciliation Commission.  Ratner, who is a professor at the University of Michigan Law  School, was a former member of the U. N.  Group of Experts for  Cambodia, whose work laid the basis for the Khmer Rouge  trials. The panel has a four-month deadline to complete its mandate  from the day it starts work. The three experts will examine the modalities, applicable  international standards and comparative experience with  regard to accountability processes, taking into account the  nature and scope of any alleged violations in Sri Lanka,  according to a U. N.  statement released Tuesday. 