Every day, as many as 260 trucks filled with supplies for U. S.   troops - from muffins to fuel to armoured tanks  - are driven  from the Pakistani port of Karachi across the Khyber pass into  Afghanistan. Supply lines through the high mountain passes of Afghanistan  have always been a dangerous mission - the Soviets  reportedly spent most of their occupation in the 1980s  fighting off attacks.  The U. S.  has chosen another method -  outsourcing the delivery and even the protection of the  vehicles to private contractors. Almost four out of every five containers delivered to  Afghanistan are now hauled by a consortium of eight Afghan,  Middle Eastern and U. S.  companies under a 2. 16-billion- dollar contract called Host Nation Trucking (HNT) that  started May 1, 2009.  A typical large convoy of trucks may  travel with 400 to 500 guards in dozens of trucks armed with  heavy machine guns and rocket-propelled grenades. These trucks come under irregular attack.  On Dec.  7, 2008, a  parked convoy of trucks carrying military vehicles for U. S  forces in Afghanistan near Peshawar was attacked by  insurgents who torched and destroyed 96 trucks.  As recently  as Jun.  8, 2010, a convoy of contractor was attacked when it  stopped at a depot just outside of Islamabad.  The insurgents  burnt 30 trucks and killed six people. In November 2009, Aram Roston of the Nation magazine  published a startling article: The trucking and security  contractors were paying off warlords, and perhaps even the  Taliban. On Tuesday, a new report by U. S.  Congressional investigators  titled: 'Warlord, Inc.  Extortion and Corruption Along the  U. S.  Supply Chain in Afghanistan' confirmed Roston's  allegations.  The six-month investigation was conducted by  the staff of the House Subcommittee on National Security and  Foreign Affairs, which is chaired by John Tierney, a  Democrat from Massachusetts. 'The HNT contractors and their trucking subcontractors in  Afghanistan pay tens of millions of dollars annually to  local warlords across Afghanistan in exchange for  'protection' for HNT supply convoys to support U. S.  troops,'  wrote the investigators in the 79-page report. 'Within the HNT contractor community, many believe that the  highway warlords who provide security in turn make  protection payments to insurgents to coordinate safe  passage. 'Memos show that occasionally the contractors even worked  with the insurgents to shake down the U. S.  military for more  money. 'U. S.  taxpayer dollars are feeding a protection racket in  Afghanistan that would make Tony Soprano proud,' Tierney  said in a prepared statement, making reference to the  fictional mafia boss of a popular TV series.  'This  arrangement has fueled a vast protection racket run by  shadowy network of warlords, strongmen, commanders, corrupt  Afghan officials, and perhaps others. 'The report comes on the heels of a two-day hearing in the  U. S.  Congress by the Commission on Wartime Contracting into  abuses - including multiple charges of killings of civilians  - by private security contractors hired by the State  Department and the Pentagon in Iraq. Three high-ranking military officials were asked to report  to Tierney and other members of the subcommittee at a public  hearing in Congress on Tuesday.  'Why weren't questions  raised about these allegations earlier?' asked Congressman  Mike Quigley, a Democrat from Illinois, echoing similar  questions asked repeatedly by Tierney. 'I was personally unaware of these kinds of allegations but  we take it seriously,' said Lieutenant General William  Phillips, principal military deputy to the assistant  secretary of the army for acquisition, logistics, and  technology.  He explained that it was difficult to  investigate corruption in Afghanistan. Tierney dismissed this answer.  Noting that the allegations  were widely rumoured within days of the new contract and  appeared in the media in late 2009, he pointed out that his  staff was easily able to secure meetings with one of the  warlords.  'It took one email and when we met with him, he  readily admitted to bribery and corruption. 'Perhaps a more accurate answer came from Brigadier General  John Nicholson, the director of the Pakistan/Afghanistan  Coordination Cell for the Joint Chiefs of Staff at the  Pentagon.  The issue that his office ranked highest, said  Nicholson: 'Was the product delivered on time?' explaining  that the military's highest priority was making sure that  supplies got to the troops. Congressman Jeff Flake, a Republican from Arizona, said that  a more appropriate question was: 'Where is the tipping point  when we say that that the funding of a parallel authority  structure should become unacceptable?''There seems to be very little indication the Department of  Defence is doing anything,' Flake concluded. Several experts also testified to the subcommittee that the  new report presented a major problem for U. S.  military  objectives in Afghanistan. Colonel T. X.  Hammes, senior research fellow at the National  Defence University, said that the military needed to look  into whether or not the choice of contractors 'directly  undercut(s) a central theme of our own counterinsurgency  doctrine. '*This article was produced in partnership with CorpWatch -  www. corpwatch. org. 