Despite President Barack Obama's denial that his decision to  fire Gen.  Stanley A.  McChrystal as commander in Afghanistan  and replace him with Gen.  David Petraeus signified any  differences with McChrystal over war strategy, the decision  obviously reflects a desire by Obama to find a way out of a  deepening policy crisis in Afghanistan. Although the ostensible reason was indiscreet comments by  McChrystal and his aides reported in Rolling Stone, the  switch from McChrystal to Petraeus was clearly the result of  White House unhappiness with McChrystal's handling of the  war.  It had become evident in recent weeks that McChrystal's  strategy is not working as he had promised, and Congress and  the U. S.  political elite had already become very uneasy  about whether the war was on the wrong track.  In calling on Petraeus, the Obama administration appears to  be taking a page from the George W.  Bush administration's  late 2006 decision to rescue a war in Iraq which was  generally perceived in Washington as having become an  embarrassing failure.  But both Obama and Petraeus are  acutely aware of the differences between the situation in  Iraq at that moment and the situation in Afghanistan today. In taking command in Iraq in 2007, Petraeus was being called  upon to implement a dramatically new counterinsurgency  strategy based on a major 'surge' in U. S.  troops.  Obama will certainly be put under pressure by the Republican  Party, led by Sen.  John McCain, to agree to eliminate the  mid-2011 deadline for the beginning of a U. S.  withdrawal and  perhaps even for yet another troop surge in Afghanistan.  But accounts of Obama administration policymaking on the war  last year make it clear that Obama caved into military  pressure in 2009 for the troop surge of 2010 only as part of  a compromise under which McChrystal and Petraeus agreed to a  surge of 18 months duration.  It was clearly understood by  both civilian and military officials, moreover, that after  the surge was completed, the administration would enter into  negotiations on a settlement of the war.  Petraeus's political skills and ability to sell a strategy  involving a negotiated settlement offers Obama more  flexibility than he has had with McChrystal in command.  Contrary to the generally accepted view that Petraeus  mounted a successful counterinsurgency campaign in Iraq, his  main accomplishment was to make the first formal  accommodation with Sunni insurgents.  Petraeus demonstrated in his command in Iraq a willingness  to adjust strategic objectives in light of realities he  could not control.  He had it made it clear to his staff at  the outset that they would make one last effort to show  progress, but that he would tell Congress that it was time  to withdraw if he found that it was not working. As commander in Iraq, Petraeus chose staff officers who were  sceptics and realists rather than true believers, according  to accounts from members of his staff in Iraq.  When one aide  proposed in a memorandum in the first weeks of his command  coming to terms with the Shia insurgents led by Moqtada al  Sadr, for example, Petraeus did not dismiss the idea.  That willingness to listen to viewpoints that may not  support the existing strategy stands in sharp contrast to  McChrystal's command style in Afghanistan.  McChrystal has  relied heavily on a small circle of friends, mainly from his  years as Special Operations Forces (SOF) commander, who have  been deeply suspicious of the views of anyone from outside  that SOF circle, according to sources who are familiar with  the way his inner circle has operated. In an interview with IPS, one military source who knows  McChrystal and his staff described a 'very tight' inner  circle of about eight people which 'does everything  together, including getting drunk'. 'McChrystal surrounded himself with yes men,' said another  source who has interacted with some of those in the inner  circle.  'When people have challenged the conventional  wisdom, he's had them booted out,' the source said. The McChrystal inner circle has been accustomed to the  insularity that Special Operations Forces have traditionally  had in carrying out their operations, the source added. The primary example of McChrystal's rejection of outside  expertise that challenged his beliefs cited by the sources  is the case of David Kilcullen. Kilcullen, a retired Australian Army officer, is recognised  as one of the most knowledgeable specialists on insurgency  and was an adviser to Petraeus in Iraq in 2007-2008.   Kilcullen is known for speaking his mind, even if it  conflicts with existing policy. After McChrystal took command of U. S.  and NATO forces in  Afghanistan last year, Kilcullen was slated to become an  adviser on his staff.  But after some early interactions  between Kilcullen, and the McChrystal team, that decision  was reversed, the sources said.  Kilcullen's views on targeted killings as wrongheaded  clashed with the assumptions of McChrystal and his inner  circle.  McChrystal's staff was also supposed to create a 'red team'  of outside specialists on Afghanistan who could provide  different perspectives and information, but after the inner  circle around McChrystal tightened its control over outside  information, the idea was allowed to die, according to one  source. Several members of McChrystal's inner circle are officers  who worked for the general during his five-year stint as  head of the Joint Special Operations Command, which carried  out targeted raids aimed at killing or capturing insurgent  leaders in Iraq and Afghanistan from 2003 to 2008, the  sources say. Two of the key officers on McChrystal's staff who were part  of his former JSOC inner circle are his intelligence chief,  Maj.  Gen.  Michael T.  Flynn and his Deputy Chief of Staff for  Operations, Maj.  Gen.  Bill Mayville. Flynn was McChrystal's director of intelligence at JSOC from  2004 to 2007 and then his director of intelligence at the  Joint Staff in 2008-2008.  Mayville also served under  McChrystal at JSOC. McChrystal's political adviser, retired Army Col.  Jacob  McFerren, is not a veteran of JSOC.  But he is described by  one source familiar with McChrystal's team as one of the  general's old Army 'drinking buddies'.  *Gareth Porter is an investigative historian and journalist  specialising in U. S.  national security policy.  The paperback  edition of his latest book, 'Perils of Dominance: Imbalance  of Power and the Road to War in Vietnam', was published in  2006. 