Sexual violence against women has become part of modern  warfare around the world.  In some countries, women cannot even  go out to draw water without fear of being attacked and raped. On Apr.  1, Margot Wallström became the Special  Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict for U. N.   Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon.  Her job is to investigate  abuses and make recommendations to the Security Council. The appointment of Wallström, currently a vice president of  the European Commission, comes amidst continued reports of  gender violence, including rape and sexual abuse both  locally and by humanitarian aid workers and U. N.   peacekeepers, mostly in war zones and in post-conflict  societies. The incidents of sexual attacks, both on women and children,  have come from several countries, including Cote d'Ivoire,  Sudan, Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC), Haiti, Burundi,  Guinea and Liberia. One of Wallström's first assignments was a trip to the DRC,  a nation she calls 'the rape capital' of the world.  Excerpts  from the interview with Wallström follow. Q: Tell us about your trip.   A: Congo has attracted attention in the media [as a place  that is suffering] systematic rape in war.  One statistic  quoted is 200,000 rapes since the beginning of the war 14  years ago, and it is certainly an underestimate. When in Congo, I met government representatives and  particularly women who had been raped and violated.   It was  interesting but also disappointing - nothing is getting  better and more and more civilians are committing rapes. But I should be fair and say that there has been progress,  the government has introduced laws against rape, it has a  national plan and there is political will.  There is a lot to  do to implement the legislation, but now there is an  ambitious legal ground to stand on to be implemented by the  police, judiciary and health care. Q: What are the roots of the problem?  A: The sexual violence in Congo is the result of the war  between the many armed groups.  To put women in the front  line has become a part of modern warfare. Men often feel threatened in times of conflict and stay  inside, but the women have to go out and get water and  firewood and go to the fields to find food.  In many cases  they'll be the first to be attacked.  Especially if there is  no paid national army that can protect civilians, rape is a  part of the looting and crimes against the innocent.  In  addition, there is almost total impunity for rape in the  Congo. Q: The U. N.  has its own force, MONUC, in Congo to protect  civilians.  What is being done to help women?  A: MONUC has had to adjust their operations after the  conditions in the country.  For example, MONUC has special  patrols which escort women to health care clinics and  markets. Q:  The U. N.  and the Congolese government are discussing  when the U. N.  should leave the country.  What would happen if  the U. N.  left the Congo now?  A: We have reason to be worried if the United Nations would  leave the Congo.  It is still unsettled in some parts of the  country and the U. N.  provides logistics for many of the NGOs  operating in the country, and they rely in the U. N. What is happening right now is that [the government] wants  to show that it can protect the country itself - it's a part  of the debate on independence. Q: How do feel when you hear about U. N.  peacekeepers  committing atrocities?  A: Just one example is too much.  It destroys our confidence  in the U. N. 's ability to do great things. Q: There is criticism that the U. N.  is a bureaucratic and  inflexible organisation.  Do you agree?  A: In every large organisation there is critisism like this.   After 10 years in the European Commission, I can recognise  such trends here, there is always.  But basically, there are  high hopes and great confidence in the U. N.  and the energy  and passion that exists for the U. N.  is very useful. Q: The Security Council has promised to focus even more on  the issue of violence against women.  Which countries should  be focused on?  A: Congo is a given, also Darfur and a number of other  countries in Africa.  We will also focus on Liberia, where it  is more a post-conflict society which has been brutalised  and where rape is the most common offence.  We cannot be in  all countries with conflicts, we will comply with the  Security Council agenda.  This is a problem that not only  exists in Africa. Q: What can your staff do on site?   A: Our team of legal experts can help a country to establish  a modern legislation.   Impunity is the foundation of the  problem, the women have to go with guilt and the men go  free.  We must try to understand how such a culture is  created and how it can be a method of warfare.  Then we can  stop it. 