Nearly a week after the abrupt demise of Washington's top  commander in Afghanistan, U. S.  strategy for reversing the  flood of bad news that has been recently pouring out of that  strife-torn country remains as unclear as ever. Led by Sen.  John McCain and many of the same neo- conservatives who championed the war in Iraq, hawks are  calling on President Barack Obama to abandon his July 2011  timetable for beginning to withdraw U. S.  combat troops in  favour of an open-ended military commitment to achieve  'victory' over the Taliban and al Qaeda. At the same time, war sceptics argue that the forced  resignation of Gen.  Stanley McChrystal - reportedly over the  indiscreet and even contemptuous remarks he and his  entourage expressed to a reporter from 'Rolling Stone'  magazine about his civilian superiors - offers the  administration a golden opportunity to move up the  timetable, reduce the U. S.  military presence, and get behind  a negotiated settlement with the Taliban sooner rather than  later. Most analysts are eagerly awaiting the next week's testimony  by Gen.  David Petraeus, the current chief of the U. S.   Central Command (Centcom) who, in replacing the indiscreet  and impolitic McChrystal as the head of U. S.  and allied  forces in Afghanistan, has accepted a reduction in his  regional responsibilities. Petraeus, whose stewardship in Iraq in 2007 and 2008 is  credited with turning around a disastrous situation and  established his reputation as a master of counterinsurgency  (COIN), is expected to be asked some very difficult  questions during his Senate confirmation hearings about what  changes, if any, he anticipates bringing to his new job. As perhaps the most politically adept general of the last  several generations, Petraeus will no doubt try to weave his  way between the two camps in answering those questions.  He  knows full well that his success - however he defines it -  will depend at least as much on his ability to retain the  support and confidence not only of Obama, but also on  politicians from both parties in Congress, as on the  difficult situation he faces in Afghanistan itself. Even with Petraeus's appointment - hailed almost universally  as a political masterstroke by Obama - confidence in current  strategy, however it is understood, is not high, both in  Congress and among the general public. In a survey of Congressional insiders published Friday after  Petraeus's appointment, the National Journal found that only  13 percent of Democrats and three percent of Republicans  said they were 'very confident' of the administration's  conduct of the war.  Fifty-one percent of Democrats and 26  percent of Republicans said they were 'somewhat confident',  while 36 percent of Democrats and a whopping 71 percent of  Republicans said they were either 'not very confident' or  'not confident at all'. Even more remarkable has been the shift in public opinion  which had already become markedly less supportive of the war  even before McChrystal's ouster.  While significantly more respondents in several polls have  supported the general's dismissal by Obama than opposed it,  confidence that the war is being won appears to have dropped  precipitously. According to a survey conducted late last week by Newsweek,  only 24 percent of respondents - the lowest percentage in  the nearly nine years U. S.  troops have been deployed to  Afghanistan - believe the U. S.  is 'winning' there, while a  46 percent plurality believes Washington is 'losing'.   Another 19 percent believe the war is stalemated. Just two weeks before, an ABC/Washington Post poll found  that 42 percent of respondents believed the U. S.  was  'winning'; 39 percent that it was 'losing'; and 12 percent  that it was neither winning nor losing. As a student of the Vietnam War and a COIN specialist,  Petraeus himself knows how difficult it is to fight a long  war - and Afghanistan just surpassed Vietnam as the longest  U. S.  war in history - in the face of waning public  confidence back home.  He also knows that public confidence  can only be gained by showing tangible progress on the  ground. Progress, however, may be very difficult to show, at least  over the critical next five months, at the end of which the  administration is committed to conducting a comprehensive  review of its strategy. Indeed, that was the bleak assessment conveyed - by none  other than McChrystal himself - to defence ministers from  NATO and other members of the International Security  Assistance Force (ISAF) earlier this month, according to a  report in Britain's Independent newspaper Sunday. The article suggested that McChrystal's resignation may have  resulted more from his pessimism than from his indiscretion  with reporters.  It reported that the general complained that  the Afghan army and police were 'critically short on  trainers'; that an 'ineffective or discredited' central  government enjoyed 'full authority' in only five of 122  districts; and that there was a 'low level of confidence  that positive trends will be sustained over the next six- month period'.  He also described the Taliban and associated  groups as a 'resilient and growing insurgency'. Since that assessment, of course, the news out of  Afghanistan has only gotten worse.  Not only have U. S.  and NATO casualties risen sharply with  the Taliban's spring-summer offensive, but growing  indications from Afghan President Hamid Karzai that he wants  to negotiate a power-sharing agreement with the Taliban has  raised the spectre of renewed civil war between the Pashtuns  on the one hand and the Tajik, Uzbek, and Hazara minorities  that led the fight against the Taliban from the mid-1990s to  Taliban's ouster in 2001 on the other.  Meanwhile, an incessant stream of reports of government  corruption is adding to the growing conviction that  Washington's efforts to extend Kabul's authority - a key  component of the strategy Obama adopted with Petraeus's  advice and consent as Centcom commander only nine months ago  - could well prove counterproductive.  'Karzai Officials Seen Impeding Bribery Probes', for  example, was the headline featured on the front page of  Monday's Washington Post.  At the same time, the Wall Street  Journal reported that more than three billion dollars in  cash - some of which is believed to have been U. S.  aid - had  been flown out of Kabul airport in the past three years. Nonetheless, a variety of hawks — notably McCain; some  prominent neo-conservatives, such as the Weekly Standard's  William Kristol and Max Boot at the Council on Foreign  Relations; and COIN enthusiasts, such as Michael O'Hanlon of  the Brookings Institution, and John Nagl, the head of the  influential Center for a New American Security - insist that  the situation is not as bad as depicted in the news and that  the war remains salvageable, especially under Petraeus. '(L)osing the war there would be cataclysmic,' wrote Nagl, a  former officer who co-authored the Army's Counter-Insurgency  Field Manual with Petraeus, in the New York Daily News last  week.  He claimed that current strategy is working; that the  Taliban is losing sanctuaries in Pakistan; and that the  Afghan government and security forces are 'growing in  capability and numbers'. The right-wing hawks also claim that the strategy has made  important inroads but insist that Obama should abandon his  mid-2011 deadline for beginning to withdraw U. S.  troops. 'I'm against a timetable,' Mccain said Sunday.  'Gen.   Petraeus is put in an almost untenable position. 'Others have urged that Obama replace key civilian officials,  notably the U. S.  ambassador to Kabul, Karl Eikenberry, and  the president's Special Representative to Afghanistan and  Pakistan, Richard Holbrooke, who allegedly undercut  McChrystal; bypass the central government by financing and  arming tribal militias and other local authorities; and  loosen McChrystal's strict rules of engagement designed to  minimise civilian casualties, so that U. S.  troops can more  aggressively attack suspected Taliban forces. *Jim Lobe's blog on U. S.  foreign policy can be read at  http://www. ips. org/blog/jimlobe/. 