A system designed to track the success of Afghan police  training is deeply flawed, says a report from the Special  Inspector General for Afghanistan (SIGAR). Some 67 out of 101 Afghan National Police (ANP) units rated  capable of working independently had regressed within a  year, says the report that was published Tuesday. 'It basically has not been a dependable system on which to  determine the capability of the Afghan national security  forces,' says SIGAR chief Arnold Fields. Washington-based SIGAR was created by the U. S.  Congress in  January 2008 to conduct independent investigations of the 39  billion dollars in humanitarian and reconstruction  assistance provided to Afghanistan. The 55-page report, 'Actions Needed to Improve the  Reliability of Afghan Security Force Assessments', is bound  to complicate the Barack Obama administration's plans for  Afghanistan.  One of the key goals for a drawdown of U. S.   troop levels by July 2011 is that at least 100,000 trained  police officers should be operating in Afghan towns as well  as in the scattered hamlets that make up the bulk of the  country. For example, the inspectors requested a visit to the  Baghlan-e Jadid police district in northern Afghanistan,  which received the top rating in August 2008 and maintained  the rating for nine months until it 'graduated' in June  2009. But in February 2010, U. S.  police mentors refused to escort  the inspectors to Baghlan-e Jadid, because it was 'not  secure'.  International Security Assistance Force (ISAF)  officials also refused, saying that the district was  'overrun with insurgents'. One ISAF official, whose name is withheld in the report,  stated that the police force in Baghlan-e Jadid had  'withered away to the point that it barely functions'.   Another U. S.  military official, quoted in the report, said:  'Most of their police officers do not even have uniforms,  nor has the majority received basic training, either. 'A mentorship team in northern Afghanistan summed up the  situation for the inspectors: 'The ANP will simply stop  doing what we asked them to do as soon as we leave the area.   This is especially troublesome in areas of security and  patrolling. 'Focused District DevelopmentUntil recently, Afghanistan has never really had a national  police force, though before the Soviet invasion of 1979  there was a conscription system that produced rank-and-file  cops working under a trained officer corps.   In 2002, in the  wake of the Taliban's defeat, the Germans set up a police  academy in Kabul that offered a five-year training programme  aimed at bringing back the officer corps.   In 2003, the U. S.   awarded a small contract to DynCorp to run a train-the- trainers programme in Kabul, based on prior work it had done  in Haiti and the former Yugoslavia. Yet no one spent much time worrying about beat-cop training,  least of all the George W.  Bush administration, which was  already immersed in planning the invasion of Iraq and  preferred to operate in Afghanistan with what it liked to  call a 'light footprint'. By 2005, security in Kabul was deteriorating sharply.  At the  same time, the spectacular failure of the U. S.  effort to  create a brand new police force in Iraq had helped spark a  bloody, devastating civil war in Baghdad, the Iraqi capital.   Somewhere in this period, Bush administration officials  started to wake up to the possibility that Afghanistan might  be heading in the same direction.  A series of new contracts  were then issued to DynCorp by the State Department's Bureau  of International Narcotics and Law Enforcement Affairs. The initial training was widely considered to be a failure.   At a June 2008 discussion at the U. S.  House of  Representatives Subcommittee on National Security and  Foreign Affairs, Congressman John Tierney summed up findings  on the 433 Afghan National Police units this way: 'Zero are  fully capable, three percent are capable with coalition  support, four percent are only partially capable, 77 percent  are not capable at all, and 68 percent are not formed or not  reporting. 'In order to fix these failures, a new, intensive training  programme called Focused District Development (FDD) was  launched, under which every police officer in specific  districts would be removed en masse for eight weeks of  training in another part of the country.   In the meantime,  the country's elite police unit, the Afghan National Civil  Order Police (ANCOP), was to temporarily take over local  policing duties.  When the original force returned, a  mentorship team of 14 internationals accompanied them to  provide advice and - at least theoretically - to root out  corruption. By March 2010, FDD was claiming success.   One in eight  police districts in the whole country was rated as  'independently capable'.  The rating was even higher for the  districts that had completed FDD, where as many as one in  five was assessed as independent, a vast improvement over  zero percent in 2008. Flawed measuresYet these ratings are now being thrown into question by  SIGAR which says that the 'capability measure' system  developed by ISAF is itself flawed or based on inadequate  data. For example, the rating system gives high marks to a unit  that has sufficient vehicles.  But the inspectors discovered  that this is not a good enough measure.  For example, when  the inspectors paid a visit to Bati Kot, a top-rated police  district in Nangarhar province in eastern Afghanistan, they  discovered that the district had 10 vehicles on hand, but  only three capable drivers. The inspectors found that as many as 44 percent of police  district reports had been missing in a single month when  they asked to look at documents filed from September 2009  through February 2010. Most problematic, according to SIGAR, was the fact that the  police units were not able to get adequate supplies like  weapons and vehicles, and that police officers often quit as  soon as the ratings were completed. The year-to-date attrition for ANCOP - 'the premier force in  the ANP' - was about 73 percent on average, with one in  western Afghanistan reporting 140 percent attrition,  suggesting that police officers were quitting faster than  they were being trained.  'Mentors said this severe attrition  was largely due to actions taken by powerful anti-coalition  forces and disappointment over pay levels,' the inspectors  reported. One particularly embarrassing finding by SIGAR is that the  Pentagon itself has also allegedly fudged data - claiming to  have capability ratings for as many as 559 police units in  October 2009, even though only 229 police units were being  directly mentored or partnered and assessed as of March  2010. The new report has already been challenged.  Lieutenant  General William Caldwell IV, the head of the NATO Training  Mission in Afghanistan, said the report was 'inaccurate,  outdated and damaging'. However, the senior U. S.  commander in Afghanistan,  Lieutenant General David Rodriguez, said that the general  picture painted was 'accurate'. *This article was produced in partnership with CorpWatch -  www. corpwatch. org. 