U. N.  Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon is heading for a second  round of political brawling with the powerful 118-member Non- Aligned Movement (NAM) over his decision to appoint a panel of  experts to advise him on possible violations of humanitarian  law by the Sri Lankan military during the concluding stages of  its war against Tamil separatists last May. A draft letter of protest, currently in circulation among  NAM members, expresses 'serious concern' about the  appointment of the panel 'against the clearly expressed  wishes of the country concerned, and without any mandate  from the Human Rights Council, the Security Council or the  General Assembly'. The letter will be formally submitted to the secretary- general next week provided there are no objections from any  NAM members. Asked for his comments, U. N.  spokesperson Farhan Haq told  IPS: 'As far as I am aware, discussion is still going on in  NAM about the letter. ''I am not aware whether the membership agreed to it or not,'  he said. NAM is the largest single political coalition at the United  Nations, after the Group of 77, a 130-member economic  coalition of developing countries. A diplomatic source told IPS: 'We hear the secretary- general's office is upset with the letter. 'He also said the U. N.  secretariat is apparently arguing that  the NAM letter will jeopardise Ban's plans to appoint a  similar international panel to investigate charges of war  crimes against Israel over last month's attack on a flotilla  of ships carrying humanitarian aid to Gaza. But the proposed panel to investigate Israel was authorised  by the Security Council while Sri Lanka's panel wasn't. A similar NAM letter of protest was sent to Ban last March  warning him against the appointment of the proposed panel on  Sri Lanka. After a response from the secretary-general, in which he  claimed he had a legitimate right to appoint such a panel,  NAM virtually backed down from a possible confrontation with  the U. N chief. 'I am convinced it is well within my power as secretary- general of the United Nations to ask such a panel to furnish  me with their advice of this nature,' Ban told news  reporters in March.   'This does not in any way infringe on the sovereignty of Sri  Lanka,' Ban explained.  But with the current letter, NAM is reverting back to its  original hard-line stand, namely, that Ban has exceeded his  political authority in naming the panel. The letter also says 'the Non-Aligned Movement expresses  serious concern about the selective targeting of individual  countries which it deems contrary to the founding principles  of the Movement. ''In this context,' the letter continues, 'the Movement  firmly opposes the unilateral evaluation and certification  of the conduct of states as a means of exerting pressure on  Non-Aligned countries and other developing countries. 'The letter says that Sri Lankan President Mahinda Rajapaksa  has already appointed his own commission of inquiry to probe  any violations of international norms and standards during  the conflict. 'It is a well recognized international norm that in  situations where there are allegations or breaches of  international law that the country concerned should in the  first instance be allowed to conduct its own investigation  and to make known its findings,' the letter says. In this instance, says the letter, the secretary-general has  appointed a panel on Sri Lanka to advise him on the  modalities, applicable standards and comparative experience  with regard to accountability processes 'even before the  commission of inquiry in Sri Lanka has commenced its inquiry  and without any express request from any member state or  group or U. N.  body or without seeking the opinion of any  group of member states or U. N.  body'. The three members of the Sri Lanka panel, who were named  last month, are Marzuki Darusman of Indonesia as chair,  along with Yasmin Sooka of South Africa and Steven Ratner of  the United States. The panel is expected to advise the secretary-general on  'implementing the commitment on human rights accountability'  made in a joint statement issued by Ban and Sri Lankan  President Rajapaksa after the U. N.  chief visited the island  nation in May 2009. Rajapaksa, who scored an overwhelming victory at recent  elections, primarily on the strength of his military's  defeat of the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE), has  consistently denied charges of war crimes and violations of  humanitarian law. The United Nations, however, has said that an estimated  7,000 or more civilians were killed during the height of the  battle that continued for over three decades. And international human rights groups have accused the  military of executing LTTE rebels even as they surrendered. At the same time, these groups have also accused the LTTE of  committing war crimes and killing civilians. The panel has a four-month deadline to complete its mandate  from the day it starts work. 