As the Barack Obama administration continues to roll out  justifications for its policy of targeting U. S.  citizens and  others thought to be attacking U. S.  troops, legal and national  security experts are pondering a central question: What if  there's a mistake and the wrong person gets killed?There are no do-overs.  It is a death sentence.  That, in fact, has already happened.  A Reuters cameraman was  killed by a U. S.  drone strike when the operator mistook his  camera's long-range lens for a rocket-propelled grenade.   Nevertheless, a top Obama counterterrorism official is  defending the government's right to target U. S.  citizens  perceived as terror threats for capture or killing, citing  the example of the renegade al Qaeda-linked cleric Anwar al- Awlaki.  Al-Awlaki, 39, was born in Las Cruces, New Mexico, and is an  Islamic lecturer who is a dual citizen of the U. S.  and  Yemen.  He is a spiritual leader and former imam who has  purportedly inspired Islamic terrorists.  His sermons are  said to have been attended by three of the 9/11 hijackers. Michael Leiter, director of the National Counterterrorism  Center, does not say whether al-Awlaki is on a U. S.  target  list, but a senior U. S.  counterterrorism official has  previously confirmed that the cleric is among terror targets  sought to be captured or killed. What does the law say about targeting and killing people? Much of the discussion thus far has been about the  constitutionality of such killings.  But, counter- intuitively, the constitution is not the primary engine.  It  is largely the laws of war that are in play here. Except for those who do not believe the U. S.  is at war.   Among these is Marjorie Cohn, immediate past president of  the National Lawyers Guild, who tells IPS: 'Targeted or  political assassinations - sometimes called extrajudicial  executions - are carried out by order of, or with the  acquiescence of, a government, outside any judicial  framework. 'She cited a 1998 report from the United Nations Special  Rapporteur that noted, 'extrajudicial executions can never  be justified under any circumstances, not even in time of  war.  Willful killing is a grave breach of the Geneva  Conventions, punishable as a war crime under the U. S.  War  Crimes Act. 'And 'This is not a war,' she adds. On the issue of killing citizens vs.  non-citizens, Daphne  Eviatar of Human Rights First (HRF), explains to IPS,  'Whether the target is a citizen isn't so important, because  he's targetable if he's an enemy belligerent or civilian  who's directly participating in hostilities against the  United States. 'She adds, 'The problem with the government's drone programme  is that it hasn't provided the public with enough  information to determine whether the government is complying  with those legal requirements.  The fact that someone is  suspected of having ties to al Qaeda or even supporting al  Qaeda does not make them a member of a foreign force  fighting the United States, or someone directly  participating in hostilities against the United States. ''Until the U. S.  starts providing information about not only  who they're targeting but what evidence exists that this  person is a legitimate target, then we can't know if what  they're doing is legal,' she says. Prof.  Peter Shane of Ohio State University law school  agrees.  He tells IPS, 'So long as the executive branch  engages in reasonable processes to distinguish persons who  are combatants from those who are not, I do not think that  the use of force against them is . . . unconstitutional. ''Whether any specific targeted killing is or is not a good  idea, of course, is a completely different question,' he  says. Scott Horton, a constitutional lawyer and contributing  editor at Harper's Magazine, tells IPS, 'There are two ways  the government can justify the extrajudicial killing of an  American citizen: one is when the person is in the act of a  crime that threatens the lives of others, or serious injury  to them, and no other means exists to stop him.  The other is  in the context of a war. ''The Obama administration appears to think that the second  case is applicable with respect to Al-Awlaki, but if they  have evidence to prove it, they certainly haven't advanced  it to the public,' he says. And even if they have such evidence, he adds, 'They haven't  explained why they don't simply have him arrested and  brought back to stand charges based on the crimes they  believe he has committed, which appear to include terrorist  activities and perhaps treason. ''They obviously need to explain why that approach won't work  before they go dropping bombs in circumstances that might  kill large numbers of innocent civilians in addition to  killing Al-Awlaki,' Horton said.   Col.  Morris Davis, the Defence Department's former chief  prosecutor for terrorism cases who argued on behalf of a  terrorism suspect that the military justice system has been  corrupted by politics and inappropriate influence from  senior Pentagon officials, tells IPS:'The fifth amendment says U. S.  citizens can't be 'deprived  of life, liberty, or property without due process of law. '  If the constitution prohibits the government from taking  your house without giving you a hearing and the opportunity  to defend yourself, it seems rather ironic that they might  take your life with even less formality and less process. ' Prof.  Francis Boyle of the University of Illinois shares  serious reservations about how the government is conducting  its targeting programme.  He tells IPS, 'What is being proposed here with respect to  al-Awlaki and other United States citizens on the CIA's now  publicly admitted 'hit list' is murder, assassination,  extrajudicial execution, a grave violation of their right to  life and human rights law, and of the Fifth Amendment to the  United States Constitution. 'Glenn Greenwald, constitutional lawyer and contributor to  Salon. com, is similarly troubled by the targeting policy.  He  asks: 'Could the individuals who trust the U. S government to  essentially convict people of terrorism and impose a death  penalty through imperial decree  - i. e. , without any trials  or judicial review, and based solely on the unchecked say-so  of the Executive Branch - please identify themselves, and  particularly explain the basis for that trust in light of  this disgraceful and error-plagued record?' Greenwald concludes: 'We really are talking about a  president who believes he has the right to send the CIA to  murder American citizens based purely on allegations and  suspicions of wrongdoing. 'Bruce Fein, a conservative legal expert who served in the  Justice Department during the Ronald Reagan administration,  proffers another idea.  He tells IPS, 'Congress should enact a companion law to FISA  (the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act. ) The president  should be required to obtain a judicial warrant based on  probable cause to believe the suspected American is  currently actively involved in seeking to kill United States  citizens. ''The warrant should authorise capture of the American  suspect for trial in the U. S. , or, a targeted killing if  capture is infeasible or would raise a grave risk of death  or serious bodily injury to the U. S.  authorities pursuing  the capture,' he says. 