The follow-up investigation of a botched Special Operations  Forces (SOF) raid in Gardez Feb.  12 that killed two government  officials and three women, ordered by Gen.  Stanley A.   McChrystal Apr.  5, was ostensibly aimed at reconciling  divergent Afghan and U. S.  accounts of what happened during and  after the raid. That implied that the U. S.  investigators would finally do  what they had failed to do in the original investigation -  interview the eyewitnesses.  But three eyewitnesses who had  claimed to see U. S.  troops digging bullets of the bodies of  three women told IPS they were never contacted by U. S.   investigators. The failure to interview key eyewitnesses, along with the  refusal to make public any of the investigation's findings,  continued a pattern of behaviour by McChrystal's command of  denying that the SOF unit had begun a cover-up of the  killings immediately after the raid. Both the original report of the U. S.  investigation and  initial NATO report on the Feb.  12 night raid in Gardez  remain classified, according to Lt.  Col.  Todd Breasseale,  the officer who was spokesman for McChrystal on the issue  before the general was relieved of his command Jun.  23.  Casting further doubt on the integrity of the investigation,  the officer who carried out the follow-up investigation was  under McChrystal's direct command after completing the  investigation.  As a member of the SOF community who had promoted night  raids as a privileged tactic in his strategy in Afghanistan,  McChrystal had an obvious personal and political interest in  keeping evidence of an SOF cover-up of the killings out of  any official U. S.  report on the Gardez raid. Even while claiming that he could not reveal anything about  the conclusions of the report, Breasseale told IPS, 'Based  on the findings of this investigation, I can reaffirm what I  wrote on 5 April - there is no evidence of a cover-up. 'Breasseale had said in an e-mail to IPS before McChrystal  was relieved of command that 'many' survivors of the raid  were interviewed, 'depending on whether they were available  to speak to the investigating officer'. But the father and mother of an 18-year-old girl who died  from wounds inflicted by the raiders and the brother of the  police officer and the prosecutor killed in the raid all  said in interviews with IPS last week that they had never  been contacted by U. S.  investigators about what they had  seen that night.  All three gave testimony to the Afghan  investigators.  In an interview with IPS, Mohammed Tahir, the father of  Gulalai, the 18-year old girl who was killed in the raid,  said, 'I saw them taking out the bullets from bodies of my  daughter and others. ' Tahir said that he and as many as seven other eyewitnesses  had told interior ministry investigators about the attempted  cover-up they had seen.  But he insisted, 'We have never been  interviewed by the U. S.  military. ' Mohammed Saber, the brother of the two men killed in the  raid - Commander Dawood, the head of intelligence for a  district in Paktia province, and Saranwal Zahir, a  prosecutor - said he had not been interviewed by any U. S.   investigator either.  Saber told IPS, 'The Americans were  taking out the bullets from the bodies of the dead with  knives and with other equipment that they always have. ' Saber said the U. S.  soldiers refused to let relatives of the  victims go to help them as they lay bleeding to death.  Saber  said he and other eyewitnesses were taken to a U. S.  base and  detained for three nights and four days.  Sabz Paree, the 18-year-old woman's mother, also denied  being interviewed by U. S.  investigators.  'I saw everything,'  she told IPS.  'The Americans had knives and were taking out  the bullets from her. ' In response to a request for comment on the denials by the  three family members that they or other eyewitnesses had  been interviewed by the U. S.  investigator, Breasseale wrote  in an e-mail, 'All available family members who offered  themselves up to take part in the investigator's questions  when he was there were interviewed during his visit(s). 'Breasseale said the name of the Army colonel in charge of  the investigation would not be made public for reasons of  'privacy'.  He acknowledged in an e-mail before McChrystal  was relieved of duty, however, that the officer was under  McChrystal's 'operational control', although he was not at  the time he was appointed and during the investigation. The target of the raid was a young man who had been at the  celebration at the compound but had not even been detained,  according to Mohammed Saber, who was shown pictures of the  target while being held in detention for four days.  The man  turned himself in for questioning a few days later but was  then released without charge, according to Saber. The International Security Assistance Force (ISAF), the  combined U. S. -NATO command then headed by McChrystal, issued  a statement within hours of the Feb.  12 raid declaring that  the two men who died in the raid were 'insurgents' who had  fired on the raiding party, and that the troops had found  the bodies of three women 'tied up, gagged and killed' and  hidden in a room. Military officials later suggested that the women - who  among them had 16 children - had all been stabbed to death  or had died by other means before the raid.  The officials told reporters the bodies had shown signs of  puncture and slashing wounds from a knife — a claim that  appears to support the eyewitness accounts by family members  of the use of knives by SOF members to dig bullets out of  the dead bodies. The New York Times quoted a family member, Abdul Ghafar, as  recalling that he had seen bullet entry wounds on the bodies  of the three dead women that appeared to have been scraped  out to remove bullets.  'The holes were bigger than they were  supposed to be,' Gafar was quoted as saying.  When Jerome Starkey of The Times of London reported Mar.  13  that more than a dozen people interviewed at or near the  scene of the attack had said the three women were killed by  the U. S. -NATO gunmen, McChrystal's spokesman, Rear Adm.   Gregory Smith, tried to challenge the accuracy of Starkey's  reporting. On Apr.  4, ISAF admitted for the first time that the woman  had been killed as a result of the SOF raiders firing on the  two men.  However, the ISAF statement suggested that the U. S.  and  Afghan investigators had conducted a 'thorough joint  investigation' and maintained that there was no evidence of  a cover-up.  It explained the earlier statement about the  women being found bound and gagged as the result of 'an  initial report by the international members of the joint  force who were not familiar with Islamic burial customs'.  But the head of the Afghan Interior Ministry's Criminal  Investigation Department, Mirza Mohammed Yarmand, publicly  contradicted to the ISAF statement, telling the New York  Times Apr.  4 that his investigators had gotten eyewitness  accounts from survivors of tampering with the bodies of the  dead.  Yarmand told the Times that his investigation had concluded  that 'there was evidence of tampering in the corridor inside  the compound by the members' of the SOF raiding unit. Within 24 hours of the publication of Yarmand's revelations,  McChrystal's spokesman was telling reporters that McChrystal  had ordered a new U. S.  investigation, even as he was  continuing to deny that there any evidence of SOF tampering  with the evidence.  *Gareth Porter is an investigative historian and journalist  specialising in U. S.  national security policy.  The paperback  edition of his latest book, 'Perils of Dominance: Imbalance  of Power and the Road to War in Vietnam', was published in  2006.  Ahmad Walid Fazly reported from Kabul. 