Experts from over 100 U. N.  member states will convene Monday  for two weeks to discuss the elements to be included in a  long-awaited Arms Trade Treaty (ATT) - what will be a  multilateral, legally-binding document regulating the transfer  of conventional weapons and small and light arms. The upcoming meeting is the first of four Preparatory  Committee sessions to take place in 2010 and 2011, leading  up to the 2012 Conference during which the ATT is expected  to be formally negotiated and ratified.  These sessions also  build upon four years of discussions by government experts  and working groups since December 2006, when the U. N.   General Assembly adopted the first of three resolutions  calling for an international Arms Trade Treaty. A report published by Oxfam International and 11 other non- governmental organizations in October 2009 denounced the  'snail's pace' of 'diplomatic wrangling' surrounding the  ATT, noting that in the then three years since the first  resolution was adopted, 2. 1 million people - or 2,000 people  per day - had died from armed violence. Ambassador Roberto Garcia Moritan of Argentina, chair of the  Preparatory Committee, highlighted the importance and  complexity of ATT negotiations at a press conference on  Friday.  'The purpose of the [ATT] is to try to adopt common  international standards to be applied by all states when  they export and import weapons,' said Moritan.  'It's a very  delicate and sensitive matter and at the same time a very  urgent one. 'Moritan acknowledged the divergent interests and  'preoccupations' of different states and regions, and told  IPS that the ATT would be an instrument for 'extreme cases'  of irresponsible weapons transfers.  As an example, Moritan  cited the 1994 Rwandan genocide, during which weapons were  knowingly sold to groups conducting severe human rights  abuses, raising questions of how less clear-cut cases would  be treated by the ATT. 'Of course countries are looking into the question with  caution, but… I'm still confident that most member states,  even [abstainers like China, India and Russia] - which are  important producers and very responsible states - they will  see the advantage of having a multilateral instrument of  this sort, because at the end of the day an instrument of  this kind shouldn't affect the sovereign right of any nation  to buy, to produce, to export weapons to any country,'  Moritan told IPS. Moritan noted that approximately 80 percent of conventional  arms sales is dominated by a small number of countries and  that over 100 nations produce conventional weapons. 'Although it's an issue that has been in the agenda since  the League of Nations, somehow it's a new issue in the sense  that we are now facing multilateral negotiations,' Moritan  told IPS. Major arms dealers Britain, France and Germany support the  Arms Trade Treaty.  However, 19 states abstained from voting  on the U. N.  General Assembly's third and most recent  resolution about the ATT in late 2009, including China and  Russia - two major arms exporters — and Egypt, India, Iran  and Pakistan - nations with active domestic arms industries.   Zimbabwe was the only state to vote against the resolution. Different in this round of discussions on the potential  objectives, scope and parameters of the ATT is the backing  of the United States, the world's biggest conventional arms  dealer, accounting for about 40 percent of the global trade,  according to Amnesty International.  The U. S.  voted in support of the 2009 resolution, reversing  the policy of the previous George W.  Bush administration.  In  the past, the U. S.  has claimed that national controls on  conventional weapons transfers would be more effective than  a multilateral treaty in preventing the diversion of legally  traded weapons into the illegal market, where they could be  purchased by terrorist groups or used for human rights  violations. The U. S.  voted against the first two U. N . General Assembly  resolutions on the ATT in 2006 and 2008. Of concern to groups like Oxfam International and Amnesty  International is the stipulation that ATT negotiations are  to be decided by consensus - a recommendation made in 2008  by the Group of Governmental Experts, a predecessor of next  week's Preparatory Committee.  This provision for consensus decision-making was formally  included in the 2008 and 2009 U. N.  General Assembly  resolutions, and was framed by Secretary of State Hillary  Clinton last October as a condition of U. S.  support of the  ATT. Clinton stated that consensus decision-making - which  effectively gives states veto power during negotiations -  was necessary to prevent states from taking advantage of  loopholes in order to engage in irresponsible arms sales.   However, some fear that it will serve to water down the  final product and appeal to the lowest common denominator -  or, indeed, address only the most extreme of cases.  