While speculation over a possible Israeli attack on Iran’s nuclear facilities  intensifies, at least one influential analyst here is calling on Washington to focus  more on the likelihood of a new war breaking out between Israel and Lebanon’s  Hezbollah militia and how to prevent or contain it. In his eight-page ‘Contingency Planning Memorandum’ released last week by  the Council on Foreign Relations (CFR), U. S.  Ambassador Daniel Kurtzer (ret. )  argued that Israel was more likely than Hezbollah to initiative hostilities and  that it could 'also use a conflict with Hezbollah as the catalyst and cover for  an attack against Iran’s nuclear facilities. 'He also warned that, as in the 2006 war that was touched off by Hezbollah’s  attack on an Israeli border patrol, 'even small-scale military engagements  with limited objectives can escalate into a major conflict' involving outside  powers - notably Syria - with 'significant implications for U. S.  policy and  interests in the region. ''If the next Israeli-Hezbollah confrontation were to result in a sharp decline  in Hezbollah’s military capabilities and was not accompanied by substantial  civilian casualties or destruction of Lebanon’s civilian infrastructure, the result  would be beneficial for U. S.  interests,' he wrote.  'However, such an outcome  is slim. ''The more likely unfolding of an Israeli-Hezbollah war would hold almost no  positive consequences for the United States, which is focused on three Middle  East priorities: trying to slow or stop Iran’s nuclear program, withdrawing  combat troops from Iraq, and helping Middle East peace talks succeed,'  according to his report, entitled ‘A Third Lebanon War’. In an email exchange with IPS, the author, Kurtzer, who served as ambassador  to both Israel and Egypt and specialised in the Middle East during a  distinguished foreign-service career spanning three decades, stressed that he  did not believe war was imminent, despite an escalation of rhetoric in recent  months on both sides of the border. 'My timeframe for the crisis to erupt was 12-18 months,' he wrote.  'I don’t  think the immediate term poses risks, but the situation could change or  deteriorate rapidly and without much advance warning. 'Speculation about an Israeli attack on Iran’s nuclear programme has grown in  recent weeks, as both Israeli Prime Minister Binyamin Netanyahu and his neo- conservative allies here have argued that recently adopted U. S.  and  international economic sanctions are unlikely to persuade Tehran to curb its  nuclear programme before it accumulates enough highly enriched uranium to  manufacture a bomb. In just the past week, since Netanyahu returned home from a summit here  with President Barack Obama, neo-conservatives, who have been close to  Netanyahu’s Likud Party since the early 1980’s, have stepped up calls for  Washington to provide support for Israel should it decide to carry out an  eventual attack, or, better yet, to carry out its own. Indeed, the cover story of this weeks Weekly Standard, a hard-line neo- conservative publication headed by William Kristol, is entitled ‘Should Israel  Bomb Iran?’.  The story, by Reuel Marc Gerecht, who worked previously at the  American Enterprise Institute (AEI) and is currently employed by another  Likudist group, the Foundation for Defense of Democracies (FDD) is sub- titled ‘Better Safe Than Sorry’. While Kurtzer’s study does not address the likelihood of such an attack, it  argues that Hezbollah’s increasingly potent missile arsenal - much of it  believed to be supplied by Iran, as well as Syria - and the security threat it  poses to Israel may move policymakers in the Jewish state to 'take preemptive  military action'. While it does not exclude the possibility that Hezbollah could launch an  attack, possibly to unify its supporters, particularly after the passing of Shi’a  cleric Muhammad Hussein Fadlallah or at the urging of an Iranian leadership  eager to deflect international pressure on its nuclear programme, the more  likely scenario is for Israel to either initiate hostilities or 'lure [Hezbollah] into  a war to destroy capabilities that threaten Israel’s security,' according to  Kurtzer, who also served as a key Middle East adviser to the Obama during his  presidential campaign. 'The combination of… the size and quality of Hezbollah’s missile inventory;  the possible acquisition of long-range, accurate missiles; and the possible  upgrading of Hezbollah’s surface-to-air missile capability changes the  equilibrium on the ground to an extent that Israel views as threatening,'  according to the report.  The report argues that Israel would likely exploit an  'operational opportunity', such as an attack against a convoy carrying long- range weapons or a storage facility in Lebanon or even in Syria that it claims  Hezbollah is using. The study noted that indicators and other warning signs of war are 'already  evident' and include an increase in anti-Israeli rhetoric on Hezbollah’s part  and in official statements on Hezbollah from Israel - specifically, recent  allegations that the group had acquired Scud missiles from Syria and that its  fighters are being trained there in their use.  It also pointed to heightened  levels of Israeli military and civil-defence preparedness on the northern front. If war breaks out, according to Kurtzer, Washington could suffer serious  setbacks to its regional priorities, including a resumption of Syrian support  for Iraqi insurgents in Iraq and the likelihood that U. S. -encouraged Arab- Israeli peace efforts would 'enter another deep freeze'. Washington’s capacity to prevent a war, according to the study, is 'limited'  given both Israel’s perception of the threat and the fact that Washington has  no relations with Hezbollah or Iran and that Obama’s initial efforts to upgrade  ties with Syria have largely stalled as a result of opposition by Republicans  and the right-wing leadership of the so-called Israel Lobby. Nonetheless, Kurtzer calls for Washington to upgrade U. S. -Israeli intelligence  exchanges; re-iterate U. S.  support for Israel’s right of self-defence and  concerns about Hezbollah’s re-armament; increase pressure on Syria to halt  arms shipments to Hezbollah; support international monitoring efforts; and  prepare both for the likelihood of war and its aftermath, including the  possibility of launching a post-conflict diplomatic initiative to promote a  broader Arab-Israeli peace process. Joshua Landis, a Syria expert at the University of Oklahoma, expressed  disappointment that the study did not recommend a more assertive effort by  Washington to push Netanyahu into negotiations with Syria over the occupied  Golan Heights as a way of gaining Damascus’ co-operation in curbing arms  supplies to Hezbollah. 'The study touches on settling the Golan issue only in passing, which is the  core for Syria and could get to the root of the problem,' Landis, whose  www. syriacomment. com blog is widely read here, told IPS.  'It’s disheartening  because it seems that such an august think tank as CFR has given up on  ending the Arab-Israeli conflict and is today reduced to recommending very  smart methods to manage it. 'Kurtzer confirmed that, while Syrian President Bashir al-Assad 'appears  interesting again in negotiations [with Israel], …Netanyahu has shown no  apparent interest.  This could change, if progress stalls with the Palestinians or  if the defense establishment [in Israel] persuades Netanyahu to switch his  focus to Syria. '*Jim Lobe's blog on U. S.  foreign policy can be read at www. lobelog. com