Thursday’s announcement in Jakarta that Washington will resume training for  the Indonesian military’s controversial Special Forces unit (Kopassus) has been  denounced by human rights groups and two key lawmakers here. The announcement - which lifts a ban on co-operation with Kopassus dating  back to 1999 - was made by visiting Secretary of Defence Robert Gates, who  has continued efforts launched by the administration of President George W.   Bush to restore full bilateral military ties between the two nations. 'I was pleased to be able to tell the president that as a result of Indonesian  military reforms over the past decade, the ongoing professionalisation of the  TNI [the Indonesian Armed Forces], and recent actions by the Ministry of  Defence to address human rights issues, the United States will begin a  gradual, limited programme of security co-operation activities with the  Indonesian Army Special Forces,' Gates told reporters after meeting with  President Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono. 'I noted to the president that these initial steps will take place within the  limits of U. S.  law and do not signal any lessening of the importance we place  on human rights and accountability,' he went on.  'What’s more, our ability to  expand upon these initial steps will depend upon continued implementation  of reforms within Kopassus and TNI as a whole. 'That caveat, however, did not appease rights groups that have long regarded  Kopassus, including some of their highest-ranking officers, as responsible for  some of the most notorious mass killings, assassinations, disappearances,  and other serious abuses committed in Southeast Asia’s most populous  nation - notably in the former East Timor, Papua, and Aceh, over the past 20  years. 'Amnesty International is disappointed by the decision that U. S.  forces will  train the Kopassus unit,' said T.  Kumar, the director for international  advocacy of the U. S.  branch of Amnesty International (AIUSA).  'It sends the  wrong message in a country where mass and severe human rights violations  have taken place in an atmosphere of impunity. ''The [Barack] Obama administration has just failed a key test,' said Sophie  Richardson, Asia director at New York-based Human Rights Watch (HRW).   'This is not the way to encourage reform with a military that has yet to  demonstrate a genuine commitment to accountability for serious human  rights abuses. ''This decision rewards Kopassus for its intransigence over abuses and  effectively betrays those in Indonesia who have fought for decades for  accountability and justice,' she noted, adding that Jakarta has not only failed  to remove the very few Kopassus soldiers who have been convicted of serious  rights violations from the military, but has also recently promoted officers  linked by credible evidence to past abuses to top Kopassus positions. The announcement was also denounced as 'premature' by the Sen.  Russell  Feingold, the former chair of the Senate’s Asia subcommittee and as 'deeply  regret[able]' by Sen.  Patrick Leahy, who wrote the law banning U. S.  aid and  training for any foreign military unit credibly suspected of major abuses. 'Although the Indonesian Ministry of Defense has taken some positive steps,  numerous problems remain, including allegations of recent abuses,' Feingold  said in a statement.  'Further actions are needed before we can be reasonably  satisfied that Kopassus, and the Indonesian armed forces more broadly, have  become a reformed institution accountable to international human rights  standards and the rule of law. ''The ‘gradual, limited program of security cooperation activities’ described by  Secretary Gates should certainly not be seen as wiping the slate clean for  Kopassus - that is something that only a full accounting of the past can do,'  Feingold added. Thursday’s announcement constitutes the latest development in what has  been a gradual rapprochement between the Pentagon and the TNI. Washington first began heavily supporting Indonesia’s military in the late  1950’s.  Between then and the period that followed the fall of President  Soeharto in 1998, the army was seen, especially by the Pentagon, as the one  effective - if corrupt and often brutal - national institution in an archipelago  that spreads across thousands of kilometres and straddles key sea lanes and  shipping 'chokepoints'. After a massacre by Indonesian troops of more than 100 peaceful  demonstrators in East Timor in 1991, Congress cut off Indonesia’s access for  certain kinds of U. S.  military training and 'lethal' equipment. When the TNI, Kopassus, and their local auxiliaries rampaged through East  Timor after its electorate voted to secede from Indonesia in 1999, President  Bill Clinton severed all remaining ties with the TNI, but then quietly restored  contacts the following year.  Some 1,400 civilians died in that mayhem for  which no soldier has ever been tried and convicted. After the 9/11 terrorist attacks on New York City and the Pentagon, the Bush  administration tried to circumvent Congressionally imposed restrictions by  providing some assistance, although not to Kopassus, through a counter- terrorism programme. By highlighting the operations of al Qaeda operatives - responsible for a 2002  bombing in Bali that killed nearly 200 people - in Indonesia, the  administration made slow but steady progress in restoring ties over the  following years, including lifting the arms embargo. Amid growing concern about China’s influence and increasing naval strength  in the region, however, the Pentagon has pushed hard to restore full military  ties with Jakarta, including with Kopassus.  But, it has reportedly received  some resistance from Indonesia specialists in the State Department and the  National Security Council. The latter, like the rights groups, argued that Kopassus continued to commit  serious abuses, especially in Papua, and remained largely unaccountable to  civilian authority. In response to U. S.  demands over the last few months, Jakarta shifted at least  three Kopassus officers previously convicted by military courts of abuses to  other positions within the TNI.  In addition, the defence minister told an  English-language newspaper that soldiers found by a military tribunal to have  committed genocide or crimes against humanity would be tried by a civilian  court. 'The U. S.  government appears to have considered these steps satisfactory to  ensure future accountability…,' HRW complained Thursday, adding that the  decision to start training Kopassus now risks undermining the limited  progress towards professionalism that the Indonesian military has made thus  far. 'Indeed, in April this year, Col.  Nugroho Widyo Utomo, who in 1998 reportedly  played a key role in creating and arming the militias that later carried out  much of the violence in East Timor the following year, was appointed deputy  commander of Kopassus. Pentagon officials told reporters here that initial contacts with Kopassus will  be quite limited and that, in any event, the State Department will vet any  members of the force before they can receive training. Leahy said he expected Gates to follow through on his pledge to condition  Washington’s co-operation with Kopassus on the implementation of real  reforms, including prosecuting 'past and future crimes' committed by its  members.  'I deeply regret that before starting down the road of re- engagement, our country did not obtain and Kopassus did not accept the  necessary reforms we have long sought.  But a conditional toe in the water is  wiser at this stage than diving in. ''The United States and Indonesia share important interests, and I have sought  a way forward that is consistent with our interests and our values.  I hope that  will become possible,' Leahy said. But rights activists remain doubtful.  'For years, the U. S.  provided military  training and other assistance to Kopassus, and when the U. S.  was most  involved, Kopassus crimes were at their worst,' said John Miller, national co- ordinator of the East Timor Action Network (ETAN).  'While this assistance  improved the Indonesian military’s deadly skills, it did nothing to improve its  behaviour. '*Jim Lobe's blog on U. S.  foreign policy can be read at www. lobelog. com 