The 92,000 reports on the war in Afghanistan made public by  the whistleblower organisation WikiLeaks, and reported Monday  by the Guardian, The New York Times and Der Spiegel, offer no  major revelations that are entirely new, as did the Pentagon  Papers to which they are inevitably being compared. But they increase the political pressure on a war policy  that has already suffered a precipitous loss of credibility  this year by highlighting contradictions between the  official assumptions of the strategy and the realities shown  in the documents - especially in regard to Pakistan's role  in the war. Unlike the Pentagon Papers, which chronicle the policymaking  process leading up to and during the Vietnam War, the  WikiLeaks documents chronicle thousands of local incidents  and situations encountered by U. S.  and other NATO troops  that illustrate chronic problems for the U. S. -NATO effort.  Among the themes that are documented, sometimes dramatically  but often through bland military reports, are the seemingly  casual killing of civilians away from combat situations,  night raids by special forces that are often based on bad  intelligence, the absence of legal constraints on the abuses  of Afghan police, and the deeply rooted character of  corruption among Afghan officials.  The most politically salient issue highlighted by the new  documents, however, is Pakistan's political and material  support for the Taliban insurgency, despite its ostensible  support for U. S.  policy in Afghanistan.  The documents include many intelligence reports about Lt.   Gen.  Hamid Gul, the director of the ISI, Pakistan's military  intelligence agency, in the late 1980s, continuing to work  with the Taliban commanders loyal to Mullah Omar as well as  the Jalaluddin Haaqani and Gulbuddin Hekmatyar insurgent  networks.  Some of the reports obviously reflect the anti-Pakistan bias  of the Afghan intelligence service when it was under former  Northern Alliance intelligence chief Amrullah Saleh.   Nevertheless, the overall impression they convey of  Pakistani support for the Taliban is credible to the news  media, because they confirm numerous press reports over the  past few years. The New York Times led its coverage of the documents with  its report on the Pakistani-Taliban issue.  The story said  the documents reflect 'deep suspicions among American  officials that Pakistan's military spy service has for years  guided the Afghan insurgency with a hidden hand, even as  Pakistan receives more than 1 billion dollars a year from  Washington for its help combating the militants. 'The issue of Pakistani 'double-dealing' on Afghanistan is  one of the Barack Obama administration's greatest political  vulnerabilities, because it is bears on a point of  particular political sensitivity among the political and  national security elite who are worried about whether there  is any hope for success for the war strategy, even with Gen.   David Petraeus in command.  One Democratic opponent of the war policy was quick to take  advantage of the leaked documents' focus on Pakistan's  support for the Taliban.  In a statement issued Monday, Sen.   Russ Feingold, Democratic member of the Foreign Relations  Committee, said the documents 'highlight a fundamental  strategic problem, which is that elements of the Pakistani  security services have been complicit in the insurgency'. In combination with 'competing agendas within the Afghan  security forces', Feingold argued, that problem precludes  any 'military solution in Afghanistan'. Afghan President Hamid Karzai took advantage of the new  story generated by the documents to release a statement  pointing to Pakistani sanctuaries across the border as the  primary problem faced by his government.  'Our efforts  against terrorism will have no effect as long as these  sanctuaries and sources remain intact,' said Karzai. Last February, then Director of National Intelligence Dennis  Blair said what administration officials had privately  conceded.  Disrupting the 'safe havens' enjoyed by the  Taliban on the Pakistani side of the border, he said, 'won't  be sufficient by itself to defeat the insurgency in  Afghanistan', but it is a 'necessary condition' for making  'progress' in Afghanistan.  Implicitly admitting its political vulnerability on the  issue, on Sunday, the White House issued a compilation of  statements by senior administration officials over the last  18 months aimed at showing that they have been tough with  Pakistan on Afghanistan.  But none of the statements quoted in the compilation  admitted the reality that Pakistan's policy of supporting  the Taliban insurgency has long been firmly fixed and is not  going to change.  Adm.  Mike Mullen, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff,  agreed in April 2009 that 'elements' of the ISI were  'connected to those militant organisations'.  But he  suggested that Pakistani chief of staff Gen.  Ashfaq Kayani,  with whom Mullen had developed a close personal  relationship, was in the process of changing the  intelligence agency. Mullen essentially pleaded for time, saying that change  'isn't going to happen overnight' and that 'it takes a  fairly significant time to change an organisation. 'Admitting that Pakistan's fundamental interests in  Afghanistan conflict with U. S.  war strategy would be a  serious — and possibly, fatal — blow to the credibility of  the Obama administration's strategy of using force to  'reverse the momentum' of the Taliban. To the extent that this contradiction and others are  highlighted in the coming weeks as the news media comb  through the mountains of new documents, it could accelerate  the process by which political support for the Afghanistan  War among the foreign policy and political elite continues  to diminish.  The loss of political support for the war among the  political and national security elite has accelerated in  recent months and is already far advanced.  More prominent  figures in the national security elite, both Republican and  Democratic, have signaled a developing consensus in those  circles that the war strategy cannot succeed, paralleling  the process that occurred in Washington in 2006 in regard to  the Iraq War. Just this past week, Robert Blackwill, former deputy  national security adviser for George W.  Bush, and Richard  Haass, former Bill Clinton administration official and  president of the Council on Foreign Relations, joined the  chorus of doubters and called for ceding southern  Afghanistan to the Taliban and withdrawing to the north.  Haas penned an article in Newsweek under the title, 'We're  Not Winning.  It's Not Worth It. ' *Gareth Porter is an investigative historian and journalist  specialising in U. S.  national security policy.  The paperback  edition of his latest book, 'Perils of Dominance: Imbalance  of Power and the Road to War in Vietnam', was published in  2006. 