Monday's release by WikiLeaks of tens of thousands of  classified documents detailing the travails of the U. S.   military in Afghanistan and Pakistan's secret support for the  Taliban from 2004 through 2009 comes amid a growing crisis of  confidence here in the nearly nine-year-old war. Coming on top of the steady increase in U. S.  and NATO  casualties in Afghanistan — July may yet exceed June as the  highest monthly death toll for U. S.  and NATO forces since  the war began in late 2001 — the unprecedented leak can only  add to the pessimism that has spread from the liberal wing  of the Democratic Party to the heart of the foreign policy  establishment, and even to a growing number of Republicans. What hope was generated by President Barack Obama's  appointment last month of Gen.  David Petraeus, whose  counter-insurgency (COIN) tactics are widely credited with  curbing Iraq's rapid descent into all-out civil war three  years ago, to command U. S.  forces in Afghanistan has largely  dissipated as a result of the steady flow of bad news - of  which the Wikileaks document dump and the weekend capture by  the Taliban of two U. S.  seamen in a remote part of the  country were only the latest examples. Even before the latest events, key figures in the foreign  policy elite were breaking with the prevailing consensus of  just a few months ago: that Obama's strategy of combining  classic COIN military tactics — notably, prioritising the  protection of the population — with building the capacity  and extending the reach of the central government through a  'civilian surge' could indeed reverse the Taliban's momentum  and force them to sue for peace. In one widely noted column published by 'Politico' in mid- July, Robert Blackwill, a senior national security official  in the administrations of both George H. W.  and George W.   Bush, called for 'partitioning' Afghanistan between the  Taliban's stronghold of the mostly Pashtun south, and the  multi-ethnic northern and western parts of the country where  the U. S.  and like-minded nations would continue to base a  sizeable force. 'Such a de facto partition would be a profoundly  disappointing outcome to America's 10 years in Afghanistan,'  wrote Blackwill, who dismissed concerns that such a move  risked creating a 'Pashtunistan' that could threaten the  territorial integrity of Pakistan, in another column in the  'Financial Times' last week.  'But, regrettably, it is now  the best that can be realistically and responsibly  achieved. 'At the same time, Richard Haass — like Blackwill, a key  official in both Bush administrations and president of the  influential Council on Foreign Relations for most of the  past decade — offered a variation of that stratagem which he  called 'decentralisation', in last week's 'Newsweek' cover  story, entitled 'We're Not Winning.  It's Not Worth It. 'Under Haass's vision, Washington would reduce its efforts to  build up the central government and the Afghan army and  security forces.  Instead, it would provide 'arms and  training to those local Afghan leaders throughout the  country who reject Al Qaeda and who do not seek to undermine  Pakistan,' including Taliban leaders willing to accept those  conditions, while maintaining sufficient U. S.  forces at the  ready to enforce them. While fighting would likely continue in Afghanistan for  years, Washington could reduce its troops levels there  significantly, according to Haass. While Haass has for some time been sceptical of Obama's  nation-building strategy in Afghanistan, other influential  supporters of the effort are also calling for major  adjustments in policy.  In the 'New Republic,' Steve Coll, a veteran regional expert  who also serves as president of the New America Foundation,  implicitly took Haass and Blackwill to task, suggesting that  their approach would essentially abandon the south to the  Taliban and the rest of the country to local warlords. Instead, he called for Washington to follow the strategy  followed by the last Communist ruler of Afghanistan,  Najibullah, after the Soviet collapse when he sought -  albeit unsuccessfully - to forge the broadest possible  alliance against the Islamist mujahdin insurgency. Washington must now — hopefully, with President Hamid  Karzai's cooperation — work to reinforce 'a national  consensus to prevent the Taliban or any other armed faction  from seizing power as international troops gradually pull  back from direct combat…,' according to Coll, who argued  that, under current circumstances, 'the Afghan body politic  is in increasing danger of fissuring,' very possibly into  civil war as U. S.  and NATO forces withdraw. While the urgency with which these alternative strategies  are being floated reflects the foreign policy elite's  disunity over what is to be done, recent polls suggest that  public confidence in the current strategy is in steady  decline. Growing - although hardly overwhelming - majorities believe  that the Afghan war, currently funded at about 100 billion  dollars a year and which last month took the lives of 102  NATO soldiers, has not been worth the cost.  Much larger  majorities believe the war is either stalemated or being  lost. Public disillusionment is increasingly reflected in Congress  where a 37 billion dollar emergency war bill has been held  up for nearly a month amid doubts about U. S.  strategy,  doubts that even Petraeus appears unable to dispel. Senate Foreign Relations Committee Chairman John Kerry,  whose loyalty to Obama's foreign policy in general and  Afghanistan strategy, in particular, has been much  appreciated by the White House, has become increasingly  uneasy in recent weeks.  He will hold hearings this week on the administration's  policy toward possible negotiations between Karzai and the  Taliban, one of the areas on which the administration - and  its NATO allies — appear to be in considerable disarray. That unease was evident Monday after the WikiLeaks release.  'However illegally these documents came to light, they raise  serious questions about the reality of America's policy  toward Pakistan and Afghanistan,' Kerry said in a prepared  statement.  'Those policies are at a critical stage and these  documents may very well underscore the stakes and make the  calibrations needed to get the policy right more urgent. ' The committee's ranking Republican, Sen.  Richard Lugar, who  supported Obama's decision last November to increase U. S.   troops levels to 100,000 by this fall, has also expressed  growing doubts about where the strategy is headed.  He warned  last week that Washington could continue 'spending billions  of dollars each year without ever reaching a satisfying  conclusion'. And while most Republicans remain hawkish on Afghanistan,  severely criticising Obama's decision to set a July 2011  deadline for beginning the drawdown of U. S.  forces from  Afghanistan, some in their rank and file, including several  figures associated with the populist 'Tea Party' movement,  are calling for an earlier date. Indeed, when the controversial Republican Party chairman,  Michael Steele, argued that Afghanistan was Obama's 'war of  choice' and suggested that it was being waged in vain, calls  for his resignation by party hawks were rejected by a number  of right-wing activists. 'America is weary,' Rep.  Jason Chaffetz told Newsweek.   'We're fast approaching a decade [of war] and no end in  sight. '*Jim Lobe's blog on U. S.  foreign policy can be read at  http://www. ips. org/blog/jimlobe/. 