Thirty-eight countries will start observing the Convention on  Cluster Munitions this Sunday, Aug.  1, after a rapid entry  into force since the treaty was announced two years ago in  Oslo. 'This new instrument is a major advance for the global  disarmament and humanitarian agendas, and will help us to  counter the widespread insecurity and suffering caused by  these terrible weapons, particularly among civilians and  children,' noted U. N.  Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon. Cluster munitions explode in mid-air to release dozens -  sometimes hundreds - of smaller 'bomblets' across large  areas.  Because the final location of these scattered smaller  bombs is difficult to control, they can cause large numbers  of civilian casualties. Bomblets that fail to explode immediately may also lay  dormant, potentially acting as landmines and killing or  maiming civilians long after a conflict is ended.  Children  are known to be particularly at risk from dud cluster  munitions since they are often attracted to the shiny  objects and less aware of their dangers. Since the countdown towards enforcement started in February  2010, the Cluster Munition Coalition (CMC), a civil society  campaign, has been raising public awareness and encouraging  countries to adhere to the 'most significant disarmament and  humanitarian treaty in over a decade'. 'Our activities more recently have been aimed at trying to  get an early entry into force, getting to the 30  ratifications necessary to do this,' Stephen Goose, one of  the founders and co-chair of the CMC and director of the  Arms Division at Human Rights Watch (HRW), told IPS.  'It is  quite unusual for so many countries to have already  completed their ratification procedures. 'After Sunday, more countries are expected to join the  current list of 38.  'Many of the states who signed but not  yet ratified are very close to ratifying it, most of them  awaiting completion of their national domestic law  procedures,' an official with the Office for Disarmament  Affaires (ODA) at the United Nations told IPS. So far, 107 countries have signed.  Others remain hesitant. For example, Thailand, a leader in the adoption of the  landmark Mine Ban Treaty in 1997, has not yet become a  signatory.  The CMC has been lobbying its Foreign Ministry to  join the treaty, and called for Thailand to attend the First  Meeting of States Parties from Nov.  9-12 in Laos. 'Although Thailand possesses cluster munition stockpiles,  this should not be a barrier to joining this important  agreement,' reads a recent letter sent by the CMC.  'Thailand  has already announced that it does not intend to use cluster  munitions and its stockpiles are outdated.  The Convention  also contains an eight year period in which States Parties  need to complete the destruction of stockpiles. 'IPS contacted the Mission of Thailand to the United Nations,  but received no answer by press time. The letter was one of many sent to governments around the  world as part of the 'Countdown to Entry Into Force'  campaign led by the coalition that appealed to governments  in Morocco, Slovakia, and Sudan, among others. 'The Convention will have a stigmatising effect even for  countries that haven't joined,' Conor Fortune, a media  officer with the CMC, told IPS.  'We've already seen that  there was international public condemnation when the weapon  was used in recent armed conflicts, by Russia and Georgia  over South Ossetia in 2008 and by Israel in Lebanon in  2006. ' In the West, the United States has also been a focus of the  coalition's efforts.  'At the moment the [Barack] Obama  Administration is engaged in a very in-depth review of their  landmine policy to see if they want to join the convention,'  Goose explained.  'The U. S.  has already acknowledged that  cluster munitions should be banned at some point in the  future. 'Meanwhile, the Pentagon declared that the U. S.  will restrain  from using cluster munitions with a failure rate of more  than one percent, which would include all but a small  fraction, by the end of 2018. '[The U. S. ] should not wait another eight years to stop  using cluster munitions; it should ban them now,' Goose  declared. Prohibition of cluster munitions, however, is just a part of  what the convention stands for.  The treaty also requires  destruction of stockpiles within eight years and clearance  of contaminated land within 10 years.  It also recognises the  rights of individuals affected by these weapons to receive  assistance and compels all countries to support states in  fulfilling their obligations. 'Assistance could be provided either bilaterally or through  the U. N. , international and regional organisations,  International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC), and NGOs,  and could take the form of financial, technical and other  assistance,' according to ODA. The primary responsibility to provide assistance lies,  however, with state parties and applies to their  jurisdiction.  If one state lacks resources, other countries  or organisations could provide it. 'Nations that remain outside this treaty are missing out on  the most significant advance in disarmament of the past  decade,' Goose said.  'If governments care enough about  humanitarian law and protecting civilians from the deadly  effects of armed conflict, they will join immediately. '