Prudential cheated the families of dead U. S.  soldiers and  Marines out of more than 100 million dollars in interest on  their life-insurance policies, according to a lawsuit filed  Thursday in a Massachusetts federal court. The suit, brought by the parents of two veterans who  committed suicide after returning home from Iraq, came as  the Pentagon, the Department of Veterans Affairs and New  York Attorney General Andrew Cuomo all announced  investigations into the allegations, first disclosed by  Bloomberg Markets magazine this week. 'We want the government and the business world to understand  that they need to stop the policy of profiting off the  deaths of our loved ones,' said one of the plaintiffs, Kevin  Lucey, whose son, former Lance Cpl.  Jeffrey Lucey, hanged  himself on Jun.  22, 2004, after returning home from his  first tour. 'They sacrificed their lives,' Lucey said.  'No one should  profit from that. 'The lawsuit cites VA reports showing that Prudential, as the  administrator of government-backed veterans' policies,  earned interest of more than 5. 69 percent on life-insurance  funds that it held for beneficiaries. Meanwhile, Prudential paid beneficiaries just one percent  interest, the suit said. That means, on an average death benefit of 400,000 dollars,  Prudential stood to earn 22,760 dollars in interest over the  course of a year, while paying survivors just 4,000 dollars. Lucey's attorney, Cristobal Bonifaz, said the interest  'doesn't belong to Prudential'. 'It belongs to the families,' he said. According to the lawsuit, Prudential paid more than 1. 2  billion dollars in death and traumatic injury claims in 2009  alone, earning interest income on nearly every claim.  The  plaintiffs say Prudential has kept more than 100 million  dollars that should have gone to veterans' families. This practice is made possible because rather than paying a  lump sum to survivors when a policyholder dies, Prudential  keeps the money in its own accounts and issues checks to the  beneficiaries that draw on those funds. According to Bloomberg, which also made similar charges  against MetLife, the practice is now widespread in the  insurance industry, affecting military and non-military  families alike.  But what's unique about the veterans' life  insurance programme, Bonifaz said, is that Prudential is  administering a programme of the federal government. 'Every government contract requires fair dealing,' he said.  The VA did not respond to repeated requests for comment.  But  in a statement, Mike Walcoff, acting undersecretary for the  Veterans Benefit Administration, said, 'The possibility that  life insurance companies are profiting inappropriately from  these service members' sacrifice is completely  unacceptable. 'Prudential spokesperson Bob DeFillippo refused to comment on  the lawsuit, but said there's nothing wrong, or illegal,  about Prudential keeping the death benefits of the bereaved  in its portfolio or holding onto a portion of the interest. 'It's like a checking account with a bank,' he said.  'You  deposit your money, and the bank pays you a fixed rate of  interest.  The bank is then free to make money on your  deposit by investing it somewhere else. 'But families of the fallen say there's a big difference  between opening a checking account at a bank and receiving a  life insurance payment when your loved one dies. When his son, Jeffrey, died, 'money was the last thing I was  thinking of,' Kevin Lucey said. 'Families assume that these people are protecting us and  would never take advantage of us,' he added.  'That's where a  lot of the anger comes from. 'Lucey said he is not seeking to enrich himself by the  lawsuit and said he hopes any settlement money goes to  charities and organisations that help other families of  other dead soldiers and Marines. *This story was originally published by New America Media:  http://news. newamericamedia. org/. 