Despite initial misgivings, U. N.  Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon  received the tacit approval of the Israeli government to  establish an international panel to probe the widely-condemned  killings of nine Turkish civilians onboard a flotilla of ships  carrying humanitarian aid to Gaza last May. 'This is an unprecedented development,' Ban said Monday,  virtually patting himself on the back. But Phyllis Bennis, a fellow of the Washington-based  Institute for Policy Studies who has written extensively on  the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, remains highly sceptical  given the Jewish state's track record. She told IPS that Israel has never accepted U. N.  or  international investigations of its human rights violations. 'Look how it rejected and condemned the U. N. 's Goldstone  Report documenting possible war crimes during the 2008-09  attack on Gaza,' Bennis said.  'Look at the refusal to allow  the U. N. 's Special Rapporteur for Human Rights in the  Occupied Palestinian Territories, Professor Richard Falk, to  enter the West Bank to carry out his mandate. 'Instead, Israeli authorities arrested him at Tel Aviv  airport, tossed him into a dirty prison cell overnight and  deported him the next day. 'Look at Israel's refusal to allow Archbishop Desmond Tutu  into Gaza to help conduct an international investigation,'  Bennis said.  'Look at the one time Israel pretended to agree  to cooperate with a U. N.  investigation team, in 2002, when  the U. N.  was set to examine the killing of civilians in the  Jenin refugee camp during Israel's re-occupation of the West  Bank. 'Israel agreed to accept the team, only to demand more and  more concessions, finally reneging altogether on its  promise, rejecting the team, leaving then U. N.  Secretary- General Kofi Annan to shamefacedly disband the team, then  cooling their heels in Geneva, and sending them home, said  Bennis, author of 'Calling the Shots: How Washington  Dominates Today's U. N. 'That ill-fated 20-member fact-finding mission was headed by  former Finnish President Martti Ahtissari. Responding to questions, U. N.  spokesperson Martin Nesirky  told reporters Monday the current panel will not be involved  in any criminal investigation. 'It has been tasked with making findings about the facts,  circumstances and context of the incident, as well as  recommending ways of avoiding similar incidents in the  future,' he added. Last month Israel appointed its own panel of inquiry, widely  criticised as a cover-up attempt, to probe the Gaza flotilla  killings. Mouin Rabbani, a widely-respected political analyst and  contributing editor to the Washington-based Middle East  Report, told IPS: 'The Israeli report on the armed naval  assault on the Gaza Freedom Flotilla was a complete sham. 'He said there was in fact no need to wait for the  publication of the report to reach this conclusion. 'The concept that Israel is capable of investigating itself,  and producing anything remotely credible, has been  demonstrated as beyond the capacity of the Israeli system,  time and time again,' he said. Israeli investigations of Israeli military conduct typically  revolve around one issue: whether the military acted with  sufficient proficiency to accomplish its objectives, and if  not, to examine what went wrong - in the narrow, technical  sense. By design, the real questions are removed from the  investigative agenda from the outset. 'Examining the legal questions surrounding this murderous  assault, not least the question of criminal liability and  consequences, do not enter into such exercises, apart from  bland and general statements that Israel has the right to do  whatever it damn well pleases,' said Rabbani.  Thus the need for a credible international investigation as  proposed by the secretary-general remains, and it is to be  hoped that this is pursued even if the prospects, as with so  much relating to Israeli accountability for criminal  conduct, appear rather doubtful, he predicted. In a statement released Monday, the secretary-general said  that for the past two months, he was actively engaged in  'intensive consultations' with the leaders of Israel and  Turkey on the setting-up of the panel. The panel will be chaired by the former prime minister of  New Zealand, Geoffrey Palmer, with the outgoing president of  Colombia, Alvaro Uribe, as vice-chair. Scheduled to begin work on Aug.  10, the panel will have two  additional members, one each from Israel and Turkey.  The  first progress report is expected to be released by mid- September. In late May, following the Israeli attack on the flotilla,  the 15-member Security Council issued a presidential  statement - far short of a resolution - 'taking note' of a  statement by the secretary- general on 'the need to have a  full investigation into the matter'. The statement also called 'for a prompt, impartial, credible  and transparent investigation conforming to international  standards'. The panel is a result of Ban's proposal to the Security  Council. Norman Solomon, executive director of the Institute for  Public Accuracy, told IPS: 'How truly independent will this  inquiry be?' That's the key question, he said. 'My initial concern is that the panel membership appears to  be tied in with politically powerful interests - not a good  sign.  Whether this will be a clarifying or whitewashing  effort remains to be seen,' he added. Bennis of the Institute for Policy Studies told IPS that the  irony, of course, is that the international and U. N. -backed  team reflects Israel's continuing U. S. -backed influence at  the United Nations. She said that Palmer was originally chosen by Israel itself  to be their international representative on Israel's own  internal probe, back when it was still rejecting the U. N.   investigation. And Colombian President Uribe, Washington's closest ally and  most reliable military dependent in all of Latin America, is  hardly likely to challenge his patron's closest ally and  military partner in the Middle East, said Bennis.  'So this four-person team, starting with one chosen by  Israel, and two others approved - if not chosen by - Israel,  plus one chosen by Turkey, hardly sounds like truly  international, let alone U. N.  representation,' she said. It may not be a complete whitewash, it may even turn into a  good precedent for a future in which Israel really is held  accountable for its violations of international law, but  this first time isn't likely to go very far, Bennis added. 