While President Barack Obama Monday touted the continuing U. S.   military withdrawal from Iraq as a key marker in the success  of his regional policies, the latest news from the Greater  Middle East, as well as a new public opinion survey, is far  less encouraging. Not only was July the deadliest month for U. S.  troops in  Afghanistan since the Taliban's ouster from power in late  2001, but the worst flooding in the critical frontier region  of Afghanistan and neighbouring Pakistan in 80 years  threatens to undo what progress the central government in  Islamabad has had over the past year in regaining control of  the area from the Pakistani Taliban and laying the  groundwork for a U. S. -backed development plan. At the same time, Obama has failed to persuade Iran to curb  its nuclear programme despite his success in getting Russia  and China to support a new round of sanctions at the U. N.   Security Council and the European Union (EU) and other  allies to impose much-stronger measures against Tehran.  Similarly, he has yet to make any discernible progress on  resolving the Israeli-Palestinian conflict — a top foreign  policy priority from the first days of his administration.  On the contrary, his failure in that respect — manifested,  in particular, by Israel's defiance of his demands to stop  all settlement activity in the occupied territories,  including East Jerusalem - has, in the view of many experts,  inflicted serious damage on his credibility throughout the  region. Even in Iraq, where he will have reduced the U. S.  military  presence from some 144,000 when he took office to 50,000 by  the end of this month, the situation hardly looks promising.  Nearly five months after parliamentary elections there and  despite pressure by the recent visits of top U. S.  officials,  including Vice President Joseph Biden and Joint Chiefs of  Staff Chairman Adm.  Michael Mullen, Iraqi political leaders  have proved unable to form a new government.  The protracted impasse has clearly stoked political and  ethnic tensions that have in turn translated into a  worrisome increase in violence.  While the U. S.  military has  insisted that the monthly death toll is half of what it was  one year ago, the Associated Press, which has independently  tracked government statistics for several years, reported  535 killings last month, the deadliest month in two years. If political paralysis, increased violence, an already-weak  economy made yet weaker by a lack of investment and  electricity, and growing concerns about fate on the on the  part of Iraq's more powerful neighbours persist, Obama may  be forced to reconsider his commitment — which he repeated  Monday in a speech to the convention of the Disabled  American Veterans — to withdraw the last U. S.  troops from  the country by the end of next year. In any event, a new Gallup/USA Today poll released Monday  suggested that U. S.  voters are losing confidence in Obama's  handling of both the Afghanistan and Iraq wars.  Despite the fact that the Iraq withdrawal is taking place on  schedule, only 41 percent of respondents said they approved  of his performance there, the lowest percentage since he  took office in January 2009.  His ratings on Afghanistan policy were even worse; only one- third of respondents voiced their approval, although a  majority of 57 percent said they favoured a gradual  withdrawal from that conflict.  Obama has pledged to begin  drawing down the nearly 100,000 U. S.  troops deployed there  currently in July next year. 'We will continue to face huge challenges in Afghanistan,'  Obama said in his speech to the veterans.  'But it's  important that the American people know that we are making  progress, and we are focused on goals that are clear and  achievable. 'In recent days, senior administration officials have sought  to reduce expectations for what Washington can achieve in  Afghanistan.  In a televised interview last Thursday, Biden  declared that the U. S.  did not intend to 'nation-build' in  Afghanistan, but only to defeat al Qaeda.  'We are in Afghanistan for one express purpose: …the al  Qaeda that exists in those mountains between Afghanistan and  Pakistan,' he said. In an interview on another network news show Sunday, Obama  took much the same line.  'What we're looking to do is  difficult, very difficult, but it's a fairly modest goal,  which is, don't allow terrorists to operate from this  region; don't allow them to create big training camps and to  plan attacks against the U. S.  homeland with impunity. 'Both statements followed a vote in the House of  Representatives last week in which 102 Democrats opposed a  bill to finance the war, which is currently costing the U. S.   Treasury about 100 billion dollars a year.  That was 70 more  than voted against a similar measure last year and  constituted nearly half of all Democrats in the lower  chamber. Wary of both the mounting death toll and the decline in  public and Democratic support for the war, the  administration appears to have decided to alter its strategy  in Afghanistan from one based on classic counterinsurgency  principles — to win the 'hearts and minds' of Afghans by,  among other things, protecting the population and providing  it with better governance and public services — to  counterterrorism, where the emphasis will be placed more on  capturing or killing Taliban commanders while wooing local  tribes and Taliban foot-soldiers with cash and other  incentives.  The administration also appears increasingly open to  possible power-sharing negotiations with the Taliban, as has  been advocated by Afghan President Hamid Karzai. Meanwhile, however, the situation across the border in  Pakistan is spurring growing concern in light of last  weekend's record flooding that has killed at least 1,500  people, displaced more than one million others, and  devastated areas around the country's northwestern border  with Afghanistan, including the Swat Valley. With prodding from the Obama administration, the area was  retaken by the Pakistani army from the Pakistani Taliban  after bitter fighting last year.  Islamabad's reconstruction  efforts have been widely criticised as slow and ineffective,  fuelling anti-government sentiment in a key strategic region  and possibly boosting the militants' standing with the  population. Now, much of the government's efforts - along with the  infrastructure - have been washed away, and the army, which  has for the last year been focused on regaining and  retaining control of the region, is now being diverted to  rescue and recovery operations. Earlier this year, the U. S.  Congress approved a five-year,  7. 5-billion-dollar aid package for Pakistan, much of which  is to be spent in the border areas affected by the flooding. *Jim Lobe's blog on U. S.  foreign policy can be read at  http://www. lobelog. com. 