Seventeen months after President Barack Obama pledged to  withdraw all combat brigades from Iraq by Sep.  1, 2010, he  quietly abandoned that pledge Monday, admitting implicitly  that such combat brigades would remain until the end of 2011. Obama declared in a speech to disabled U. S.  veterans in  Atlanta that 'America's combat mission in Iraq' would end by  the end of August, to be replaced by a mission of  'supporting and training Iraqi security forces'.  That statement was in line with the pledge he had made on  Feb.  27, 2009, when he said, 'Let me say this as plainly as  I can: by Aug.  31, 2010, our combat mission in Iraq will  end. ' In the sentence preceding that pledge, however, he had said,  'I have chosen a timeline that will remove our combat  brigades over the next 18 months. ' Obama said nothing in his  speech Monday about withdrawing 'combat brigades' or 'combat  troops' from Iraq until the end of 2011.  Even the concept of 'ending the U. S.  combat mission' may be  highly misleading, much like the concept of 'withdrawing  U. S.  combat brigades' was in 2009.  Under the administration's definition of the concept, combat  operations will continue after August 2010, but will be  defined as the secondary role of U. S.  forces in Iraq.  The  primary role will be to 'advise and assist' Iraqi forces.  An official who spoke with IPS on condition that his  statements would be attributed to a 'senior administration  official' acknowledged that the 50,000 U. S.  troops remaining  in Iraq beyond the deadline will have the same combat  capabilities as the combat brigades that have been  withdrawn. The official also acknowledged that the troops will engage  in some combat but suggested that the combat would be  'mostly' for defensive purposes.  That language implied that there might be circumstances in  which U. S.  forces would carry out offensive operations as  well.  IPS has learned, in fact, that the question of what kind of  combat U. S.  troops might become involved in depends in part  on the Iraqi government, which will still be able to request  offensive military actions by U. S.  troops if it feels it  necessary.  Obama's jettisoning of one of his key campaign promises and  of a high-profile pledge early in his administration without  explicit acknowledgement highlights the way in which  language on national security policy can be manipulated for  political benefit with the acquiescence of the news media. Obama's apparent pledge of withdrawal of combat troops by  the Sep.  1 deadline in his Feb.  27, 2009 speech generated  headlines across the commercial news media.  That allowed the  administration to satisfy its anti-war Democratic Party base  on a pivotal national security policy issue. At the same time, however, it allowed Obama to back away  from his campaign promise on Iraq withdrawal, and to signal  to those political and bureaucratic forces backing a long- term military presence in Iraq that he had no intention of  pulling out all combat troops at least until the end of  2011.  He could do so because the news media were inclined to let  the apparent Obama withdrawal pledge stand as the dominant  narrative line, even though the evidence indicated it was a  falsehood.  Only a few days after the Obama speech, Secretary of Defence  Robert Gates was more forthright about the policy.  In an  appearance on Meet the Press Mar.  1, 2009, Gates said the  'transition force' remaining after Aug.  31, 2010 would have  'a very different kind of mission', and that the units  remaining in Iraq 'will be characterised differently'.  'They will be called advisory and assistance brigades,' said  Gates.  'They won't be called combat brigades. ' But 'advisory and assistance brigades' were configured with  the same combat capabilities as the 'combat brigade teams'  which had been the basic U. S.  military unit of combat  organisation for six years, as IPS reported in March 20009. Gates was thus signaling that the military solution to the  problem of Obama's combat troop withdrawal pledge had been  accepted by the White House.  That plan had been developed in late 2008 by Gen.  David  Petraeus, the CENTCOM chief, and Gen.  Ray Odierno, the top  commander in Iraq, who were determined to get Obama to  abandon his pledge to withdraw all U. S.  combat brigades from  Iraq within 16 months of taking office.  They came up with the idea of 'remissioning' — sticking a  non-combat label on the combat brigade teams -- as a way for  Obama to appear to be delivering on his campaign pledge  while actually abandoning it.  The 'remissioning' scheme was then presented to Obama by  Gates and the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Adm.   Mike Mullen, in Chicago on Dec.  15, 2008, according a report  in the New York Times three days later. It was hardly a secret that the Obama administration was  using the 'remissioning' ploy to get around the political  problem created by his acceding to military demands to  maintain combat troops in Iraq for nearly three more years.  Despite the fact that the disparity between Obama's public  declaration and the reality of the policy was an obvious and  major political story, however, the news media — including  the New York Times, which had carried multiple stories about  the military's 'remissioning' scheme — failed to report on  it.  The 'senior administration official' told IPS that Obama is  still 'committed to withdrawal of all U. S.  forces by the end  of 2011'.  That is the withdrawal deadline in the U. S. -Iraq  withdrawal agreement of November 2008. But the same military and Pentagon officials who prevailed  on Obama to back down on his withdrawal pledge also have  pressed in the past for continued U. S.  military presence in  Iraq beyond 2011, regardless of the U. S.  withdrawal  agreement with the Iraqi government.   In November 2008, after Obama's election, Gen.  Odierno was  asked by Washington Post correspondent Tom Ricks 'what the  U. S.  military presence would look like around 2014 or 2015'.    Odierno said he 'would like to see a …force probably around  30,000 or so, 35,000', which would still be carrying out  combat operations. Last February, Odierno requested that a combat brigade be  stationed in Kirkuk to avoid an outbreak of war involving  Kurdish and Iraqi forces vying for the region's oil  resources — and that it be openly labeled as such —  according to Ricks. In light of the fact that Obama had already agreed to  Odierno's 'remissioning' dodge, the only reason for such a  request would be to lay the groundwork for keeping a brigade  there beyond the 2011 withdrawal deadline. Obama brushed off the proposal, according to Ricks, but it  was unclear whether the reason was that Iraqi political  negotiations over a new government were still ongoing. In July, Odierno suggested that a U. N.  peacekeeping force  might be needed in Kirkuk after 2011, along with a hint that  a continued U. S.  presence there might be requested by the  Iraqi government.   *Gareth Porter is an investigative historian and journalist  specialising in U. S.  national security policy.  The paperback  edition of his latest book, 'Perils of Dominance: Imbalance  of Power and the Road to War in Vietnam', was published in  2006. 