Ongoing factional disputes and mounting international  sanctions have ignited heated debates among Iran's elites  about another critical period in the country's post- revolutionary history - the 1980-88 Iran-Iraq War. That war, in which at least a quarter million Iranians are  believed to have died, hastened the rise of institutions,  such as the Basij militia and the Iranian Revolutionary  Guard Corps (IRGC), which remain key actors in Iran today. But the war also created a cultural ethos that emphasised  the epic aspects of the conflict: sacrifice and courage,  piety, the control of passions, disdain for fame and  material gain, and unconditional loyalty to the leadership. This was in some contradiction to the spirit of the 1979  Revolution when a multiplicity of voices and ideologies  competed for attention and popularity. With the new Islamic Republic under siege, however, the war  offered a pretext for the emerging political order to both  crush the domestic opposition and rally the population  behind the 'sacred defence' against international  aggression. Now that, a quarter century later, Iran faces another period  of domestic repression coupled with a tangible increase in  external pressures, key decisions made by the country's  leadership during the Iran-Iraq war are being rehashed by  the country's fractious elites. The emerging debate is being fuelled in particular by the  website of former President Akbar Hashemi Rafsanjani, who  served as speaker of Iran's parliament during the war and  acted as a key adviser to Leader Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini  who eventually appointed him to the post of commander-in- chief of the armed forces.  The website has provided a daily  recounting of key events and decisions during the war. Three issues regarding the war have relevance to Iran's  current predicament, particularly as Tehran faces ever- escalating economic sanctions because of its rejection of  international demands that it curb its nuclear programme. First and foremost is the decision to continue the war after  June 1982 when Iran had successfully pushed Iraqi forces out  of most of its territory and began taking the offensive  while rejecting Iraqi President Saddam Hussein's offers of a  ceasefire.  At that moment, the dilemma faced by the leadership in  Tehran was whether to continue the war — and the sacrifices  that implied — on behalf of a cause that was no longer  shared with the same intensity by much of the population as  it had been two years before. The generally accepted narrative in defence of the decision  to continue the war is simple: Iran could not afford a  ceasefire in 1982 because it was believed that Hussein would  use it to regroup and launch a new invasion at a moment when  Iran's leadership would find it more difficult to rally the  post-revolutionary fervour behind the regime's defence. Iraq's subsequent invasion of Kuwait in 1990 made this  narrative plausible during most of the post-war period. But, in recent years, and particularly since last year's  disputed elections, this justification has come increasingly  under question. The main point of contention has been over the apparent  disconnect at the time between the regime's declared war  aims — in Khomeini's famous slogan, 'War, War, until  Victory,' and Rafsanjani's 'War until a decisive victory,'  and even exhortations by some military leaders to take over  Baghdad — and the lack of adequate resources to achieve  those aims. Last week, for example, the former minister of the IRGC,  Mohsen Rafiqdoust, effectively accused Mir Hosein Mussavi,  the Green Movement's presidential candidate who served as  prime minister during the war, of withholding resources that  could, if provided to the military, have brought the war to  a victorious conclusion. Mussavi, who until recently kept silent in the debate about  the war, felt sufficiently provoked to respond in a  statement posted on his Kaleme website in which he  threatened to reveal the reasons for his attempted  resignation in 1988, immediately after the war's end. Noting the sacrifices that a number of former officials,  some of whom have been sentenced to prison after last year's  elections, have made in defence of the regime and the  country, Mussavi pointed out that more than 65 percent of  Iran's then-severely limited oil revenues had been spent on  a war that, at least in its initial phases, had been  incompetently run. He wrote that Rafiqdoust had been 'imposed' on him against  his will and compared the former minister's military  incompetence and promises of victory during the war to his  subsequent leadership of the Foundation for the Oppressed  and Disabled, a powerful organisation that became notorious  for its corruption and mismanagement. Of course, two other leaders most responsible for the  decisions made during the war — then-President Ali Khamenei  and Rafsanjani — also play critical roles today as Leader  and chair of the Expediency Discernment Council,  respectively. Suggesting that they also set war aims for which they were  either unwilling or unable to provide adequate resources is  a serious charge.  Even more serious, however, is the  implication that by pursuing unrealistic war aims they  imposed unnecessary sacrifice on the population when the  confrontation with an external enemy could have been ended  earlier. Thus, the regime's hardliners have mounted a predictable  effort to blame Mussavi for Iran's failure to achieve  victory.  One of his critics, Ahmad Panahian, has gone so far  as to hold Mussavi and other Green leaders responsible for  the latest round of international sanctions against Iran,  insisting that, without their post-election 'sedition',  these sanctions would not have gone into effect. A second war-related issue relevant to the situation today  relates to Khomeini's decision to accept a ceasefire in the  war after adamantly refusing to do so.  Some hard-liners,  still unable to reconcile themselves to the Leader's abrupt  reversal, now argue that he was deliberately misled by the  political leaders, including Mussavi and  Rafsanjani, of the  time. At the same time, others with a less ideological bent wonder  whether, in the face of escalating pressure, the current  regime was capable of acting as decisively as Khomeini did  in taking responsibility for ending the war despite his  prior insistence on 'War, War, until Victory. 'What is undisputed is that once Khomeini decided that Iran's  economic and military capabilities could not overcome Iraq's  heavily buttressed military machine and devastating chemical  attacks, Rafsanjani, as his appointed commander-in-chief,  offered to take the blame for failing to achieve victory and  retire from public life. Khomeini refused the offer, announcing that he himself would  drink from the 'poisoned chalice' and promising a full  explanation in the future, a promise that he failed to  fulfil before his death in June 1989, 10 months after he  accepted the ceasefire. Still Khomeini's decision to end the war assured the Islamic  Republic's survival by pre-empting a blame game among his  followers and opening the way for the so-called 'era of  reconstruction' under Rafsanjani's presidency. Indeed, it is this re-direction that constitutes the third  debate about the Iran-Iraq war and its aftermath.  Hardliners  are asking whether the same political leaders who they say  convinced Khomeini to end the war also pushed the country in  an un-Islamic direction, resulting in the abandonment of the  culture of heroic sacrifice and resistance in favour of  greater political, economic, and cultural liberalisation.  Their call is for a return to an era in which 'values' are  prized over 'reconstruction'.  They see Rafsanjani's post-war  'reconstruction' as the source of today's political,  economic, and diplomatic ills. More pragmatic elements, on the other hand, publicly worry  about, in Rafsanjani's words, 'the extremism and fanaticism  of those who, with their unwise decisions and actions, place  the revolution and (Islamic) system in the hard, perilous  situation the enemy desires. 'As Tehran prepares for renewed negotiations over its nuclear  programme, conflicting memories regarding the conduct of the  war, the circumstances that led to the decision to end it,  and the direction taken by the leadership after the war will  have a significant impact on how various forces within Iran  position themselves. *Farideh Farhi is an Independent Scholar and Affiliate of  the Graduate Faculty of Political Science at the University  of Hawai'i at Manoa. 