As the U. N.  investigates new allegations of sexual abuse by  peacekeepers in the Democratic Republic of Congo, most troop  contributing countries continue to evade accounting for how  they handle disciplinary actions. A senior U. N.  official who asked for anonymity told IPS,  'Although there have been statistical reductions in the  number of allegations, sexual abuse involving peacekeepers  is still rampant, despite pronouncements that they have been  curbed. 'In DR Congo, two peacekeepers — reportedly an Indian and a  Tunisian — have been accused of sexual abuse, although their  identities and the specifics of the cases are protected  under the U. N. 's confidentiality policy. According to the United Nations Conduct and Disciplinary  Unit, of the 45 allegations of sexual exploitation and abuse  against U. N.  peacekeepers brought in the first six months of  this year, 18 involved minors. The charges were reported to the 39 troop contributing  countries.  However, only 13 governments have responded to  the U. N.  regarding their progress in investigating the  charges and taking action, according to the New York Times.  This figure is in line with the numbers from previous years:  in 2009, the U. N.  sent 82 requests for information on  actions taken by national authorities concerning misconduct  related to sexual exploitation and abuse, and received 14  responses. In 2008, the U. N.  sent 69 such requests and received eight  responses on action taken, while in 2007, 67 requests were  made and 23 responses received. 'The U. N.  cannot tackle this issue alone,' Anayansi Lopez of  the Department of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO), told IPS.   'It needs the full support of all member states to ensure  that zero tolerance is a reality. 'Currently, there are about 124,000 peacekeepers deployed  around the globe, Lopez said. 'While allegations of sexual exploitation and abuse have  decreased from 357 in 2006 to 112 in 2009, one case is one  too many, and the U. N.  is making every effort to target this  issue,' she told IPS.  'In 2008, there were 83 such  allegations, following 127 allegations in 2007. ' However, according to the senior U. N.  official, not only are  the allegations 'a blemish on peacekeeping operations… there  could be hundreds more that have been undocumented primarily  due to the remote locations of the operations. ' Allegations of sexual exploitation and abuse by peacekeeping  and humanitarian personnel first came to light in the 1990s  in the Balkans, Cambodia and Timor Leste, and in West Africa  in 2002 and in the Democratic Republic of the Congo in 2004.  Official reports publicly surfaced in 2004, with the U. N.   mission in DR Congo the first to be singled out followed by  Haiti, Liberia and other peacekeeping missions around the  world. In DR Congo, approximately 150 allegations were filed  against U. N.  troops.  The offences — some of which were  captured on videotape — included pedophilia, rape, and  prostitution, according to a classified U. N.  report that was  obtained by the Washington Post.  Yet comprehensive record-keeping and data tracking of such  allegations and subsequent actions did not begin until 2006,  Lopez told IPS.  This left an approximately decade-long delay  in formally tracking the allegations.  One year later, in 2007, the Los Angeles Times reported that  in Haiti, 'girls as young as 13 were having sex with U. N.   peacekeepers for as little as one dollar'. Some 114 Sri Lankan peacekeepers in Haiti were removed from  their posts after those allegations surfaced.  Palitha T. B.  Kohona, Sri Lanka's ambassador to the U. N. ,  told IPS, 'It is noted that the U. N.  considers Sri Lanka's  reaction to the allegations as an exemplary case where a  national government has taken serious measures in response  to allegations of sexual exploitation by U. N.  peacekeepers.   Sri Lanka has a firm policy of not tolerating any  infractions of U. N.  standards by its peacekeeping troops. 'In July 2008, the Department of Field Support launched the  Misconduct Tracking System, a global database and  confidential tracking system for all allegations of  misconduct.  Lopez told IPS the examples of action taken by the U. N.   include demotion, termination of contract, and referral to  local authorities or national governments for further  action.  Military contingents deployed on peacekeeping  missions remain under the exclusive jurisdiction of their  own government.  In December 2007, the General Assembly adopted a Resolution  on Criminal Accountability of United Nations Officials and  Experts on Missions to address the extension of national  jurisdiction by member states to cover criminal misconduct  of U. N.  officials or experts on mission.  However, a high-level source told IPS, 'Sierra Leonean and  Sri Lankan efforts are the only serious responses to these  allegations that are publically known.  Most member states  lack sincere commitment to eradicate sexual exploitation and  abuse as evident by their actions. ' The U. N.  has a three-pronged strategy to eliminate sexual  exploitation and abuse: prevention of misconduct,  enforcement of U. N.  standards of conduct and remedial  action. Last month, Under-Secretary-General Susanna Malcorra from  the Global Field Support office of DPKO discussed the  revision of support strategy in terms of procedure and  financing.  Her discussion did not include procedures to  address the allegations.  