Omar Khadr was only 15 when he was captured by U. S.  forces in  2002 in Afghanistan.  Now, eight years later, the 23-year-old  is on trial in Guantanamo Bay, in the first military  commission trial since the beginning of the Barack Obama  administration. The Pentagon-appointed defence attorney, Lt.  Colonel Jon  Jackson, has called the case 'the first one against a child  soldier in history'. Khadr, a Canadian citizen, is accused of throwing a hand  grenade and killing a U. S.  Special Forces soldier during a  U. S.  bombardment of an al Qaeda compound in the eastern  Afghan city of Khost. Ahmed Khadr, Omar's father, was an Egyptian-born Canadian  citizen who was linked to senior levels of bin Laden's al  Qaeda network in the 1980s.  In 1993, he moved his family to  Afghanistan from where he allegedly sent money to al Qaeda. The U. N.  Secretary-General's Special Representative for  Children in Armed Conflict, Radhika Coomaraswamy, told IPS  that 'The U. N.  has advocated repeatedly that no child,  abused in war time as a child soldier or porter or war wife,  should be held personally responsible for the acts and  orders of their commanders. 'She also urged the two countries, which are both parties to  the Optional Protocol on Children in Armed Conflict, 'to  allow for Omar's reintegration into society through  rehabilitation programmes', adding that to her knowledge  'much has been done to prepare such programmes in Canada'. The statute of the International Criminal Court (ICC) states  that no one under the age of 18 should be tried for war  crimes.  Prosecutors in other international tribunals have  also used their discretion not to prosecute children in the  past. In addition, there seems to be little or no evidence that  Khadr actually threw the grenade that killed the soldier,  other than 'confessions' allegedly obtained under suspicious  circumstances. Khadr's lawyer claims that the accused was interrogated in  at the U. S. -run Bagram air base while still recovering from  serious injuries, which included two gunshot wounds and  shrapnel in his face and eye.  He was also threatened with  rape in a U. S.  prison, one interrogator confirmed, and  promised a return to Canada if he told the interrogators  what they wanted to hear. During a hearing in May, the interrogators involved claimed  they had treated Khadr very well, but did admit that he was  threatened and interrogated while still severely wounded.   These abusive interrogation methods are in violation of  Common Article 3 of the Geneva Conventions and other humane  treatment international standards.  Patrick Parish, the military judge working on the case in  Guantanamo, has decided to admit the statements extrapolated  during these interrogations into court. Prosecutor Jeff Groharing has tried to depict Khadr as a  committed and informed al Qaeda fighter, claiming that he  'embraced [the al Qaeda ideology] and used it to justify his  activities'.  In contrast, his defence attorney has described him as a  child forced into war by adults. Aside from the controversy about the detention and treatment  of Omar Khadr, there is also a debate about the fairness of  military commissions. Earlier this month Khadr's lawyer filed a petition with the  U. S.  Supreme Court, claiming that commissions are  unconstitutional because they offer a lower standard of  justice to foreign citizens, whilst U. S.  nationals also get  the protection of a federal court.  'The United Nations continues to insist that children  accused of crimes, as distinct from war crimes, must be  tried in accordance with the rules and procedures which  respect and respond to his minority at the time of the  alleged offence' Coomaraswamy told IPS, adding that  'Clearly, no military tribunal, which I am aware of, meets  these international standards'. Anthony Lake, the executive director of the U. N.  children's  agency UNICEF, has also spoken against children under 18  being tried for war crimes. The U. S.  and Canada were amongst the countries that worked  to persuade the Security Council to create and implement  norms for the protection of children in conflict. It is now their duty, Coomaraswamy commented, 'to come to a  mutually acceptable solution on the future of Omar Khadr  that would prevent him from being convicted of a war crime  he allegedly committed when he was a child'. 