Pro-Israeli journalist Jeffrey Goldberg's article in 'The  Atlantic' magazine was evidently aimed at showing why the  Barack Obama administration should worry that it risks an  attack by the government of Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu  on Iran in the coming months unless it takes a much more  menacing line toward Iran's nuclear programme. But the article provides new evidence that senior figures in  the Israeli intelligence and military leadership oppose such  a strike against Iran and believe that Netanyahu's  apocalyptic rhetoric about an Iranian nuclear threat as an  'existential threat' is unnecessary and self-defeating.  Although not reported by Goldberg, Israeli military and  intelligence figures began to express their opposition to  such rhetoric on Iran in the early 1990s, and Netanyahu  acted to end such talk when he became prime minister in  1996. The Goldberg article also reveals extreme Israeli  sensitivity to any move by Obama to publicly demand that  Israel desist from such a strike, reflecting the reality  that the Israeli government could not go ahead with any  strike without being assured of U. S.  direct involvement in  the war with Iran.  Goldberg argues that a likely scenario some months in the  future is that Israeli officials will call their U. S.   counterparts to inform them that Israeli planes are already  on their way to bomb Iranian nuclear sites.  The Israelis would explain that they had 'no choice', he  writes, because 'a nuclear Iran poses the gravest threat  since Hitler to the physical survival of the Jewish people. 'He claims the 'consensus' among present and past Israeli  leaders is that the chances are better than 50/50 that  Israel 'will launch a strike by next July', based on  interviews with 40 such Israeli decision-makers. Goldberg is best known for hewing to the neoconservative  line in his reporting on Iraq, particularly in his  insistence that that Saddam Hussein had extensive ties with  al Qaeda.  Goldberg quotes an Israeli official familiar with  Netanyahu's thinking as saying, 'In World War II, the Jews  had no power to stop Hitler from annihilating us.  Six  million were slaughtered.  Today, six million Jews live in  Israel, and someone is threatening them with annihilation. 'In his interview with Goldberg for this article, however,  Netanyahu does not argue that Iran might use nuclear weapons  against Israel.  Instead he argues that Hezbollah and Hamas  would be able to 'fire rockets and engage in other terror  activities while enjoying a nuclear umbrella'. But Israel relies on conventional forces - not nuclear  deterrence - against Hezbollah and Hamas, making that  argument entirely specious.  Goldberg reports that other Israeli leaders, including  defence minister Ehud Barack, acknowledge the real problem  with the possibility of a nuclear Iran is that it would  gradually erode Israel's ability to retain its most talented  people.  But that problem is mostly self-inflicted.  Goldberg concedes  that Israeli generals with whom he talked 'worry that talk  of an 'existential threat' is itself a kind of existential  threat to the Zionist project, which was meant to preclude  such threats against the Jewish people. ' A number of sources told Goldberg, moreover, that Gabi  Ashkenazi, the Israeli army chief of staff, doubts 'the  usefulness of an attack'. Top Israeli intelligence officials and others responsible  for policy toward Iran have long argued, in fact, that the  kind of apocalyptic rhetoric that Netanyahu has embraced in  recent years is self-defeating.  Security correspondent Ronen Bergman reported in Yediot  Ahronot, Israel's most popular newspaper, in July 2009 that  former chief of military intelligence Major General Aharon  Zeevi Farkash said the Israeli public perception of the  Iranian nuclear threat had been 'distorted'.  Farkash and other military intelligence and Mossad officials  believe Iran's main motive for seeking a nuclear weapons  capability was not to threaten Israel but to 'deter U. S.   intervention and efforts at regime change', according to  Bergman. The use of blatantly distorted rhetoric about Iran as a  threat to Israel - and Israeli intelligence officials'  disagreement with it - goes back to the early 1990s, when  the Labour Party government in Israel began a campaign to  portray Iran's missile and nuclear programmes as an  'existential threat' to Israel, as Trita Parsi revealed in  his 2007 book 'Treacherous Alliance'.  An internal Israeli inter-ministerial committee formed in  1994 to make recommendations on dealing with Iran concluded  that Israeli rhetoric had been 'self-defeating', because it  had actually made Iran more afraid of Israel, and more  hostile toward it, Parsi writes.  Ironically, it was Netanyahu who decided to stop using such  rhetoric after becoming prime minister the first time in  mid-1996.  Mossad director of intelligence Uzi Arad convinced  him that Israel had a choice between making itself Iran's  enemy or allowing Iran to focus on threats from other  states. Netanyahu even sought Kazakh and Russian mediation between  Iran and Israel. But he reversed that policy when he became convinced that  Tehran was seeking a rapprochement with Washington, which  Israeli leaders feared would result in reduced U. S.  support  for Israel, according to Parsi's account.  As a result,  Netanyahu reverted to the extreme rhetoric of his  predecessors. That episode suggests that Netanyahu is perfectly capable of  grasping the intelligence community's more nuanced analysis  of Iran, contrary to his public stance that the Iranian  threat is the same as that from Hitler's Germany.  Netanyahu administration officials used Goldberg to convey  the message to the Americans that they didn't believe Obama  would launch an attack on Iran, and therefore Israel would  have to do so.  But Israel clearly cannot afford to risk a war with Iran  without the assurance that the United States being committed  to participate in it.  That is why the Israeli lobby in  Washington and its allies argue that Obama should support an  Israeli strike, which would mean that he would have to  attack Iran with full force if it retaliates against such an  Israeli strike.  The knowledge that Israel could not attack Iran without U. S.   consent makes Israeli officials extremely sensitive about  the possibility that Obama would explicitly reject an  Israeli strikeGoldberg reports that 'several Israeli officials' told him  they were worried that U. S.  intelligence might learn about  Israeli plans to strike Iran 'hours' before the scheduled  launch.  The officials told Goldberg that if Obama were to say, 'We  know what you're doing.  Stop immediately,' Israel might have  to back down.  Goldberg alludes only vaguely to the possibility that the  threat of an attack on Iran is a strategy designed to  manipulate both Iran and the United States.  In a March 2009  article in The Atlantic online, however, he was more  straightforward, conceding that the Netanyahu threat to  strike Iran if the United States failed to stop the Iranian  nuclear programme could be a 'tremendous bluff'.  *Gareth Porter is an investigative historian and journalist  specialising in U. S.  national security policy.  The paperback  edition of his latest book, 'Perils of Dominance: Imbalance  of Power and the Road to War in Vietnam', was published in  2006. 