More than 400 homeless veterans from across northern  California relaxed in comfort at the Alameda County  Fairgrounds in Pleasanton. The occasion - a 'Stand Down', where the homeless veterans  were given access to good food, clean clothes, showers and  beds.  A group of veterans stayed in camouflage canvas tents, met  with employment counselors and even made their case to  superior court judges, who prescribed modest penalties in  exchange for dropping charges related to failed appearances  on old warrants.  Such warrants often started as unpaid  traffic tickets, but the charges escalated as they were  ignored. 'The good thing about the East Bay Stand Down is they can  get the services they need,' said Army Reserve Capt.  Tonya  Pacheco, who helped handle logistics for the event. 'If they need counseling — whatever they need it's available  to them,' she said.  'A lot of veterans will have the  opportunity to turn their lives around. '100,000 Homeless VetsNationally, the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA)  estimates that on any given night more than 100,000 veterans  are homeless, with double that number experiencing  homelessness in the course of a year. Conservatively, the National Council for Homeless Veterans  estimates that one out of three homeless men sleeping in a  doorway, alley or box in U. S.  cities and rural communities  has put on a uniform and served the country. About half of homeless veterans served their country during  the Vietnam years, and service providers say they are  beginning to see disturbing numbers of veterans recently  back from Iraq and Afghanistan living in their cars or couch  surfing with family, friends or wherever they can crash. According to the VA, 56 percent of homeless vets are African  American, even though nearly 80 percent of U. S.  military  veterans are white. As a blazing sun shone down on the fairgrounds, John Morgan  sat under a large tent in the centre of the Stand Down, a  computer thumb drive around his neck. 'I just got a resume made, and they gave me a flash drive,'  Morgan said.  'I needed to get that done 'cause I wanted to  go back to work. 'A U. S.  Army veteran, Morgan served as a medic in the burn  unit at Brooke Army Medical Center in San Antonio in the  years following the Vietnam War.  When he got out of the  military in the early 1980s, the Vacaville native started  snorting cocaine, then dealing it. 'I would work a job and save a lot of money.  And then I  would get a bundle of coke, and I would sell and I would  use. … Inevitably, I would go into jail or get in some kind  of thing with the police,' he said. This year, Morgan caught a break.  An official from the  Department of Veterans Affairs visited him at San Luis  Obispo State Prison and told him about the Homeless Veteran  Rehabilitation Programme (HVRP), a supportive housing  facility on the VA campus in Menlo Park. A month ago, when he was released from prison, Morgan went  straight to the facility. 'HVRP saved my life,' he said.  Now he's trying to make sure  he has a way to support himself once he graduates from their  program. Morgan is comparably lucky to get a space at HVRP.  According  to the VA, for the more than 12,000 homeless veterans in  Northern California, there are only about 400 transitional  housing beds. That's why the Stand Downs are so important  — for one  weekend this year, every veteran who showed up got the help  they needed. *Aaron Glantz is an editor at New America Media, where this  article first appeared, and author of two books on the Iraq  war, 'The War Comes Home: Washington's Battle Against  America's Veterans' (UC Press) and 'How America Lost Iraq'  (Tarcher/Penguin).  He is also co-author with Iraq Veterans  Against the War of 'Winter Soldier Iraq and Afghanistan:  Eyewitness Accounts of the Occupations' (Haymarket). 