The United Nations and other relief organisations will observe  World Humanitarian Day Thursday amid steadily increasing  attacks on aid workers. Established by the General Assembly in December 2008, Aug.   19 also marks the seventh anniversary of the truck bomb  attack on the Canal Hotel in Baghdad, which killed 22 U. N.   staff members in 2003.  The day aims to increase  understanding of humanitarian activities and to honour  humanitarian workers who have been killed or injured while  carrying out their work. U. N.  Secretary General Ban Ki-moon noted that 'aid workers  represent what is best in human nature'. Ban also expressed concern Monday over the increased attacks  on humanitarian workers, following various incidents  involving U. N.  personnel. On Wednesday, a base of the U. N.  mission MONUSCO was  attacked in North Kivu, Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC),  by a large group of unidentified people.  Three Indian  peacekeepers were killed and six more were injured. Concerns were also raised by the abduction last week of two  Jordanian peacekeepers working with the joint United  Nations-African Union peacekeeping force UNAMID, which took  over operations in Darfur in 2008. The officers, Ahmed Qeisi and Nabil Kilani, were kidnapped  by unidentified gunmen from their homes in Nyala, Western  Sudan, but have since been released unharmed. Aid workers have frequently been the targets of violence and  abduction, starting in Biafra, Nigeria from 1967 to 1970,  Ethiopia in the 1980s and Afghanistan in the 1990s. From 1997 to 2006, attacks on aid workers increased by 77  percent, although this is partly due to a large rise in the  overall number of aid workers. In 2009, 278 humanitarians were victims of 139 serious  security incidents, compared with 1999 when 65 humanitarians  were involved in 34 such incidents.  Last year, 102  humanitarian workers were killed. Michael Barnett, professor of political science and co- author of the book 'Humanitarianism in Question: Politics,  Power and Ethics', told IPS that 'there is relatively little  appreciation of the kinds of very real sacrifices made by  aid workers.  Days of recognition are important because they  really do serve educational value. 'However, Barnett's colleague and co-author of the same book,  Thomas Weiss, told IPS that 'there are simply too many  commemorative days for too many causes.  This day goes  largely unnoticed. 'The United Nations for the Coordination of Humanitarian  Affairs (OCHA) says key humanitarian principles include  humanity, neutrality, impartiality and independence. 'It is a constant tightrope walk to remain neutral but we  are and have to keep on insisting on that status,' Patrick  McCormick, spokesperson for the U. N.  children's agency  UNICEF, told IPS. Many challenge the apolitical and neutral image that  humanitarian agencies strive to have, arguing that aid is  mainly monopolised by the West. Barnett noted that 'all religions and cultures have  traditions of charity, relief and assistance to strangers,  and it is important that we recognize the plurality of  giving that exists'. Aid agencies are mostly Western in their origins and  financing, and only around 10 percent are from non-OECD  (Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development)  countries, which is 'not trivial, but not impressive,  especially as it is tied to special clients of Saudi Arabia  or China,' Weiss told IPS. 'Neutrality, actual or perceived, which amounts to the same  thing, is impossible in contemporary war zones.  This is the  case for humanitarian action and it is certainly the case  for reconstruction and development,' he said. Some argue that the perception, or misperception, that  humanitarian aid is influenced by specific Western  ideologies or Christianity, is the cause of the escalating  number of attacks on aid workers. 'It could be that aid has become more politicised and  Western agencies are viewed as the instrument of Western  foreign policies.  It also could be that aid agencies have  more money and therefore are a grand opportunity,' Barnett  suggested. However, others support the notion that attacks on aid  personnel are 'a part of a cold calculation that the U. N.   and humanitarians of all stripes will abandon lethal  arenas', as Weiss claims. World Humanitarian Day aims to draw attention to the kind of  complexities and difficulties that surround humanitarian  missions all over the world.  To highlight this, the theme  for this year will be 'I am a Humanitarian'. A group of aid agencies has also prepared a four-minute film  about humanitarian work, and the secretary-general will lay  a wreath in front of the memorial plaque in remembrance of  the 22 U. N.  staff members killed in Iraq. 