'Find, fix, finish, and follow-up' - also known as F4 - is the  way the Pentagon describes the mission of secret military  teams in Afghanistan which have been given a mandate to pursue  alleged members of the Taliban or al Qaeda wherever they may  be found.  Some call these 'manhunting' operations and the  units assigned to them 'capture/kill' teams. Details of some of the missions of Task Force 373 first  became public as a result of more than 76,000 incident  reports leaked to the public in July by Wikileaks, a  whistleblower website. The Wikileaks data suggests that as many as 2,058 people on  a secret hit list called the 'Joint Prioritised Effects  List' (JPEL) were considered 'capture/kill' targets in  Afghanistan.  A total of 757 prisoners - most likely from  this list - were being held at the Bagram Theater Internment  Facility (BTIF), a U. S. -run prison on Bagram Air Base, as of  the end of December 2009. The F4 concept was developed at the U. S.  Special Forces  Command in Tampa, Florida, under the leadership of General  Bryan D.  Brown, who took over the Special Forces Command in  September 2003. With the support of Donald Rumsfeld, then U. S.  secretary of  defence.  Brown also began setting up 'joint Special Forces'  teams to conduct F4 missions outside war zones.  These were  given the anodyne name 'Military Liaison Elements. ' At least  one killing by such a team in Paraguay of an armed robber  not on any targeting list was written up by New York Times  reporters Scott Shane and Thom Shanker.  The team, whose  existence had not been divulged to the local U. S.  embassy,  was ordered to leave the country. 'The number-one requirement is to defend the homeland.  And  so sometimes that requires that you find and capture or kill  terrorist targets around the world that are trying to do  harm to this nation,' Brown told the Committee on Armed  Services in the U. S.  House of Representatives in March 2006. 'Our foreign partners are willing but incapable nations that  want help in building their own capability to defend their  borders and eliminate terrorism in their countries or in  their regions,' Brown said. In April 2007, President George W.  Bush rewarded Brown's  planning by creating a special high-level office at the  Pentagon for an assistant secretary of defence for special  operations/low-intensity conflict and interdependent  capabilities. Michael G.  Vickers, made famous in the book and film  'Charlie Wilson's War' as the architect of the covert arms- and-money supply chain to the mujaheedin in the anti-Soviet  Afghan war of the 1980s, was nominated to fill the position. Under his leadership, a new directive was issued in December  2008 to 'develop capabilities for extending U. S.  reach into  denied areas and uncertain environments by operating with  and through indigenous foreign forces or by conducting low  visibility operations. ''The war on terror is fundamentally an indirect war.  It's a  war of partners, but it also is a bit of the war in the  shadows, either because of political sensitivity or the  problem of finding terrorists,' Vickers told the Washington  Post.  'That's why the Central Intelligence Agency is so  important and our Special Operations forces play a large  role. 'Bush's departure from the White House did not dampen the  enthusiasm for F4 - quite the contrary, even though F4 was  altered recently, in typical military fashion, to 'find,  fix, finish, exploit, and analyze,' or F3EA.  By all  accounts, President Obama has expanded military intelligence  gathering and 'capture/kill' programmes globally in tandem  with drone-strike operations by the CIA. There are quite a few outspoken supporters of  'capture/kill'.  Austin Long, a professor at Columbia  University in New York, is one academic who has jumped on  the F3EA bandwagon. Noting its similarity to the Phoenix assassination  programme, responsible for tens of thousands of deaths  during the U. S.  war in Vietnam (which he defends), Long  called for a shrinking of the U. S.  military footprint in  Afghanistan to 13,000 Special Forces troops who would focus  exclusively on counterterrorism, particularly assassination  operations. 'Phoenix suggests that intelligence coordination and the  integration of intelligence with an action arm can have a  powerful effect on even extremely large and capable armed  groups,' he and his co-author William Rosenau wrote in a  July 2009 Rand Institute monograph entitled 'The Phoenix  Program and Contemporary Counterinsurgency'. Others are even more aggressively inclined.  Lieutenant  George Crawford, who retired from the position of 'lead  strategist' for the U. S.  Special Forces Command to go work  for Archimedes Global, Inc. , a Washington consulting firm,  has suggested that F3EA be replaced by one term: 'Man- Hunting'. In a monograph published by the Joint Special Operations  University in September 2009, Counter-Network Organization  for Irregular Warfare,' Crawford spells out 'how to best  address the responsibility to develop manhunting as a  capability for American national security. 'These concepts have unsettled even military experts.  For  example, Christopher Lamb, the acting director of the  Institute for National Strategic Studies at the National  Defense University, and Martin Cinnamond, a former U. N.   official in Afghanistan, penned an article for the Spring  2010 issue of the Joint Forces Quarterly in which they  wrote: 'There is broad agreement that the indirect approach  to counterinsurgency should take precedence over  kill/capture operations.  However, the opposite has  occurred. 'Other military types claim that the hunter-killer approach  is short-sighted and counter-productive.  'My take on Task  Force 373 and other task forces, it has a purpose because it  keeps the enemy off balance.  But It does not understand the  fundamental root cause of the conflict, of why people are  supporting the Taliban,' says Matthew Hoh, a former Marine  and State Department contractor who resigned from the U. S.   government in protest against the war in Afghanistan last  September. Hoh, who often worked with Task Force 373 as well as other  Special Forces 'capture/kill' programmes in Afghanistan and  Iraq, added: 'We are killing the wrong people, the mid-level  Taliban who are only fighting us because we are in their  valleys.  If we were not there, they would not be fighting  the U. S. '*This article is the first of a three-part series adapted  from an article originally published on TomDispatch. com. 