Three weeks after a fatal exchange of fire between Israel and  Lebanon along the U. N. -demarcated Blue Line, the United  Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) has yet to make  recommendations on easing tension at the border. The incident, the most serious since U. N.  resolution 1701  ended the border conflict between Israel and the Lebanese  group Hizbullah in 2006, occurred on Aug.  3. Israel began trimming a tree close to the Blue Line after  having notified UNIFIL forces but without waiting for  Lebanese consent.  Lebanese soldiers opened fire.  An Israeli  commander, two Lebanese soldiers and a Lebanese journalist  were killed in the subsequent exchange of fire. The investigation currently underway commenced straight  after the incident, and is being conducted by UNIFIL forces  on the ground. The Force Commander of UNIFIL, Major-General Alberto Asarta  Cuevas, held separate meetings in Beirut with Lebanese  Parliament Speaker Nabih Berri and Prime Minister Saad  Hariri on Aug.  16. Andrea Tenenti, deputy spokesperson for UNIFIL, told IPS  that it was 'a very good meeting', but declined to comment  on the content of Asarta's presentation of the preliminary  results of the investigation in the meeting. 'The investigation is ongoing and the results will be given  to the parties.  We can't speculate on the results and what  it will reveal,' he said. Alain Le Roy, under-secretary-general for peacekeeping  operations, told reporters in New York a day after the  deadly exchange of fire that UNIFIL had determined that the  tree in question was located south of the Blue Line on the  Israeli side, and that there was no evidence that Hizbullah  was involved in any way. However, some crucial issues remain unresolved, including  whether the Lebanese Armed Forces (LAF) fired a warning  shot, and why, with a five-hour window between Israel  notifying UNIFIL of its intention to carry out 'maintenance  work' at the border and the exchange of fire, UNIFIL's  attempts to defuse tension failed. There were speculative reports in the media that the  Lebanese reporter who was killed during the incident was  there on invitation to witness the violence. 'We have reason to believe this was planned in advance,' an  Israeli Defence Forces (IDF) spokesperson, Avital Leibovich,  told reporters shortly after the incident.  UNIFIL's slow and limited disclosure of the investigation  findings highlights the greater challenges faced by the  peacekeeping operation in the area. Tension has long been high with Israeli occupation of  Ghajar, in south Lebanon, which violates U. N.  resolution  1701. Tenenti told IPS that UNIFIL has been working intensely with  both sides on the issue. 'The government of Lebanon had informed [UNIFIL] of its  readiness to accept the UNIFIL proposal to facilitate the  withdrawal of the IDF from the area.  UNIFIL is still talking  with the Israeli authorities on the modalities, but no date  [is set] for the withdrawal has been decided yet,' he said. 'We are hopeful that we will soon reach an understanding on  the UNIFIL proposal that will facilitate Israel's withdrawal  from the area,' the deputy spokesperson added.  Another contested issue is the Blue Line separating the two  sides, first drawn by the U. N.  in 2000. The Blue Line did not follow Israel's security fence in  several contested areas, often leading to misunderstandings.   Asked about the fence, Le Roy said Israel had unilaterally  built it south of the Blue Line, which was a legitimate  move.    The as-yet inconclusive investigation into this specific  skirmish only serves to highlight the slow progress in  combating the grave challenges in the region. Major General Asarta said that 'this tragic incident must  remain isolated… No one is interested in an escalation. 'The first step would be to reveal UNIFIL's findings so that  both sides could look beyond this incident and start  resolving the issues of border demarcation and the  occupation of Ghajar. UNIFIL has yet to conclude its investigation.  The findings  will be released to parties concerned only, and it is up to  them to make the information public, officials say. 