When Danny Hall and Gordon Phillips, the civilian and military  directors of the U. S.  provincial reconstruction team in  Nangahar Province, Afghanistan arrived for a meeting with Gul  Agha Sherzai, the local governor, in mid-June 2007, they knew  that they had a lot of apologising to do. Philips had to explain why a covert U. S.  military  'capture/kill' team named Task Force 373, hunting for Qari  Ur-Rahman, an alleged Taliban commander given the code-name  'Carbon', had called in an AC-130 Spectre gunship and  inadvertently killed seven Afghan police officers in the  middle of the night.  The incident vividly demonstrated the inherent clash between  two doctrines in the U. S.  war in Afghanistan:  counterinsurgency ('protecting the people') and  counterterrorism (killing terrorists).  Although the Barack  Obama administration has given lip service to the former,  the latter has been, and continues to be, the driving force  in its war in Afghanistan. For Hall, a Foreign Service officer who was less than two  months away from a plum assignment in London, working with  the military had already proven more difficult than he  expected.  In an article for the Foreign Service Journal  published a couple of months before the meeting, he wrote,  'I felt like I never really knew what was going on, where I  was supposed to be, what my role was, or if I even had one.   In particular, I didn't speak either language that I needed:  Pashtu or military. 'It had been no less awkward for Phillips.  Just a month  earlier, he had personally handed over 'solatia' payments -  condolence payments for civilian deaths wrongfully caused by  U. S.  forces - in Governor Sherzai's presence, while  condemning the act of a Taliban suicide bomber who had  killed 19 civilians, setting off the incident in question. 'We come here as your guests,' he told the relatives of  those killed, 'invited to aid in the reconstruction and  improved security and governance of Nangarhar, to bring you  a better life and a brighter future for you and your  children.   Today, as I look upon the victims and their  families, I join you in mourning for your loved ones. 'Hall and Phillips were in charge of a portfolio of 33 active  U. S.  reconstruction projects worth 11 million dollars in  Nangahar, focused on road-building, school supplies, and an  agricultural programme aimed at exporting fruits and  vegetables from the province. Yet the mission of their military-led 'provincial  reconstruction team', made up of civilian experts, U. S.   State Department officials and soldiers, appeared to be in  direct conflict with those of the 'capture/kill' team of  special operations forces - Navy Seals, Army Rangers, and  Green Berets together with operatives from the Central  Intelligence Agency's Special Activities Division - whose  mandate was to pursue Afghans alleged to be terrorists as  well as insurgent leaders. Capture/Kill OperationsDetails of some of the missions of Task Force 373 first  became public as a result of more than 76,000 incident  reports leaked to the public by Wikileaks, a whistleblower  website.  The Wikileaks data suggests that as many as 2,058  people on a secret hit list called the 'Joint Prioritised  Effects List' (JPEL) were considered 'capture/kill' targets  in Afghanistan. Task Force 373 is supposedly run out of three military bases  - in Kabul, the Afghan capital, Kandahar, the country's  second largest city, and Khost Province which borders the  Pakistani tribal lands.   It's possible that some of its  operations also come out of Camp Marmal, the German base in  the northern city of Mazar-e-Sharif. Sources familiar with the programme say that the task force  has its own helicopters and aircraft, notably AC-130 Spectre  gunships, dedicated only to its use.  Its commander appears  to have been Brigadier General Raymond Palumbo, based out of  the Special Operations Command at Fort Bragg, North  Carolina.  Palumbo, however, left Fort Bragg in mid-July  2010, shortly after General Stanley McChrystal was relieved  as Afghan war commander by President Obama.  The name of the  new commander of the task force is not known.  In more than 100 incident reports in the Wikileaks files,  Task Force 373 is described as leading numerous  'capture/kill' efforts, notably Khost, Paktika, and  Nangahar, the provinces that border the Federally  Administered Tribal Areas of northern Pakistan.   In April 2007, David Adams, commander of the Khost  provincial reconstruction team, was called to meet with  elders from the village of Gurbuz in Khost province, who  were angry about Task Force 373's operations in their  community.  The incident report on Wikileaks does not  indicate just what Task Force 373 did to upset Gurbuz's  elders, but the governor of Khost, Arsala Jamal, had  publicly complained about Special Forces operations and  civilian deaths in his province since December 2006, when  five civilians were killed in a raid on Darnami village. 'This is our land,' he said then.  'I've been asking with  greater force: Let us sit together, we know our Afghan  brothers, we know our culture better.  With these operations  we should not create more enemies.  We are in a position to  reduce mistakes. 'As Adams would later recall in an opinion article he co- authored for the Wall Street Journal, 'The increasing number  of raids on Afghan homes alienated many of Khost's tribal  elders. ' On Jun.  12, 2007, Danny Hall and Gordon Philips, working in  a province northeast of Khost, were similarly called into  that meeting with Governor Sherzai to explain how Task Force  373 could have killed those seven local Afghan police  officers.   Like Jamal, Sherzai made the point to Hall and  Philips that 'he strongly encourages better coordination,  and he further emphasised that he does not want to see this  happen again. 'Less than a week later, a Task Force 373 team fired five  rockets at a compound in Nangar Khel in Paktika Province to  the south of Khost, in an attempt to kill Abu Laith al-Libi,  an alleged al Qaeda member from Libya.  When the U. S.  forces  made it to the village, they found that Task Force 373 had  destroyed a madrassa (or Islamic school), killing six  children and grievously wounding a seventh who, despite the  efforts of a U. S.  medical team, would soon die. (In late January 2008, al-Libi was reported killed by a  Hellfire missile fired from a Predator drone in a village  near Mir Ali in North Waziristan in Pakistan. )Paktika Governor Akram Khapalwak met with the U. S.  military  the day after the raid.  Unlike his counterparts in Khost and  Nangahar, Khapalwak agreed to support the 'talking points'  developed for Task Force 373 when communicating with the  media.  According to the Wikileaks incident report, the  governor then 'echoed the tragedy of children being killed,  but stressed this could've been prevented had the people  exposed the presence of insurgents in the area. 'Yet Task Force 373's raids continued. On Oct.  4, 2007, its members called in an air strike — 500- pound Paveway bombs - on a house in the village of  Laswanday, just six miles from Nangar Khel in Paktika  Province where those seven children had already died.  This  time, four men, one woman, and a girl - all civilians - as  well as a donkey, a dog, and several chickens would be  slaughtered.  A dozen U. S.  soldiers were injured, but the  soldiers reported that not one 'enemy' was detained or  killed. On a Monday night in mid-November 2009, Task Force 373  conducted an operation to capture or kill an alleged  militant code-named 'Ballentine' in Ghazni province.  A terse  incident report announced that one Afghan woman and four  'insurgents' had been killed.  The next morning, Task Force  White Eagle, a Polish unit under the command of the U. S.   82nd Airborne Division, reported that some 80 people  gathered to protest the killings.  The window of an armoured  vehicle was damaged by the angry villagers. One of the last Task Force 373 incidents recorded in the  Wikileaks documents was a disaster for the soldiers alone.   Just before sunrise on Oct.  26, 2009, two U. S.  helicopters,  a UH-1 Huey and an AH-1 Cobra, collided near the town of  Garmsir in the southern province of Helmand, killing four  Marines. *This article is the second of a three-part series adapted  from an article originally published on TomDispatch. com