When Wikileaks, a whistleblower website, released 76,000  incident reports from the U. S.  war in Afghanistan, the  exploits of a secret military 'capture/kill' team called Task  Force 373 was revealed for the first time. The Wikileaks data suggests that Task Force 373 targeted as  many as 2,058 people in Afghanistan on a secret hit list  called the 'Joint Prioritised Effects List' (JPEL).  Yet Task  Force 373 was not the only 'capture/kill' team identified in  the documents, nor was it the first one in Afghanistan. A British unit known as Task Force 42 that is composed of  Special Air Service, Special Boat Service and Special  Reconnaissance Regiment commandos appears in at least a half  dozen documents. Task Force 42 operates in Helmand province.  Like their U. S.   counterparts, they use Hellfire missiles as well as 500- pound Paveway and Joint Direct Attack Munition (JDAM) bombs. The first of several reports in the Wikileaks files lists an  air strike 53 metres from the Pakistani border that killed  nine people on Oct.  12, 2008. On Oct.  28, 2008, Task Force 42 launched Operation Beethoven  to capture or kill Mullah Ziauddin near Lashkar Gah.   Ziauddin and three others were killed.  Ten days later Task  Force 42 fired a Hellfire missile from an Apache AH-64  helicopter in Nad-e-Ali in Helmand province and killed an  alleged Taliban member named Janan. The last Task Force 42 action incident reported in the  Wikileaks document occurred on August 28, 2009, when a team  entered a compound in Gereshk district and were blown up by  a hidden home made bomb.  Lee Andrew Houltram, a British  Royal Marine was killed while five British soldiers and an  Afghan interpreter were wounded and evacuated to Camp  Bastion.  Seven armed men leaving the site were killed by air  strikes. Task Force 121The idea of 'joint' teams from different branches of the  military working collaboratively with the U. S.  Central  Intelligence Agency (CIA) was first conceived in 1980 after  the disastrous Operation Eagle Claw, when personnel from the  U. S.  Air Force, Army, and Navy engaged in a botched seat-of- the-pants attempt to rescue U. S.  hostages in Iran with help  from the CIA. Eight soldiers were killed when a helicopter crashed into a  C-130 aircraft in the Iranian desert.  Afterwards, a high- level six-member commission led by Admiral James L.  Holloway  III recommended the creation of a Joint Special Forces  command to ensure that different branches of the military  and the CIA do advance planning to coordinate far much more  closely in the future. This process accelerated greatly after Sep.  11, 2001.   That  month, a CIA team called Jawbreaker headed for Afghanistan  to plan a U. S. -led invasion of the country.  Shortly  thereafter, a U. S.  Army Green Beret team set up Task Force  Dagger to pursue the same mission.  Despite an initial  rivalry between the commanders of the two groups, they  eventually teamed up. The first covert 'joint' team involving the CIA and various  military special operations forces to work together in  Afghanistan was Task Force 5, charged with the mission of  capturing or killing 'high value targets' like Osama bin  Laden, other senior leaders of al Qaeda, and Mullah Mohammed  Omar, the head of the Taliban.  A sister organisation set up  in Iraq was called Task Force 20.  The two were eventually  combined into Task Force 121 by General John Abizaid, the  head of the U. S.  Central Command. In a new book to be released this month titled 'Operation  Darkheart', Lieutenant Colonel Anthony Shaffer describes the  work of Task Force 121 in 2003, when he was serving as part  of a team dubbed the Jedi Knights.   Working under the alias  of Major Christopher Stryker, he ran operations for the  Defense Intelligence Agency (the military equivalent of the  CIA) out of Bagram Air Base. One October night, Shaffer was dropped into a village near  Asadabad in Kunar province by an MH-47 Chinook helicopter,  to lead a 'joint' team, including Army Rangers (a Special  Forces division) and 10th Mountain Division troops.   They  were on a mission to capture a lieutenant of Gulbuddin  Hekmatyar, a notorious warlord allied with the Taliban,  based on information provided by the CIA. It wasn't easy.  'They succeeded in striking at the core of  the Taliban and their safe havens across the border in  Pakistan.  For a moment Shaffer saw us winning the war,'  reads the promotional material for the book.  'Then the  military brass got involved.  The policies that top officials  relied on were hopelessly flawed.  Shaffer and his team were  forced to sit and watch as the insurgency grew - just across  the border in Pakistan. 'Task Force 373Task Force 121 missions are classified as 'top secret' and  therefore do not appear in the Wikileaks documents which  only cover operations classified at the lower level of  'secret'. The secret teams that are identified in Wikileaks mostly  belong to Task Force 373.  In a number of provinces - notably  Khost, Paktika and Nangahar, three eastern provinces that  border the Federally Administered Tribal Areas (FATA) of  northern Pakistan - Task Force 373 is described in over 100  incident reports in the Wikileaks files as leading numerous  'capture/kill' efforts. Some resulted in successful captures, others led to the  death of local police officers and even small children,  while some have caused angry villagers to protest and attack  U. S. -led military forces. In an ironic twist, one of the last Task Force 373 incidents  recorded in the Wikileaks documents was almost a reprise of  the original Operation Eagle Claw disaster that led to the  creation of the 'joint' capture/kill teams.  Just before  sunrise on Oct.  26, 2009, two U. S.  helicopters - a UH-1 Huey  and an AH-1 Cobra - collided near the town of Garmsir in the  southern province of Helmand, killing four Marines. *This article is the third of a three-part series adapted  from an article originally published on TomDispatch. com. 