When the Barack Obama administration unveiled its plan last  week for an improvised State Department-controlled army of  contractors to replace all U. S.  combat troops in Iraq by the  end of 2011, critics associated with the U. S.  command attacked  the transition plan, insisting that the United States must  continue to assume that U. S.  combat forces should and can  remain in Iraq indefinitely. But the differences between the administration and its  critics over the issue of a long-term U. S.  presence may be  more apparent than real.  All indications are that the administration expects to  renegotiate the security agreement with the Iraqi government  to allow a post-2011 combat presence of up to 10,000 troops,  once a new government is formed in Baghdad.  But Obama, fearing a backlash from anti-war voters in the  Democratic Party, who have already become disenchanted with  him over Afghanistan, is trying to play down that  possibility.  Instead, the White House is trying to reassure  its anti-war base that the U. S.  military role in Iraq is  coming to an end.  An unnamed administration official who favours a longer-term  presence in Iraq suggested to New York Times correspondent  Michael Gordon last week that the administration's refusal  to openly refer to plans for such a U. S.  combat force in  Iraq beyond 2011 hinges on its concern about the coming  Congressional elections and wariness about the continuing  Iraqi negotiations on a new government.  Vice-President Joe Biden said in an address prepared for  delivery Monday that it would take a 'complete failure' of  Iraqi security forces to prompt the United States to resume  combat. Obama referred to what he called 'a transitional force' in  his speech on Aug.  2, pledging that it would remain 'until  we remove all our troops from Iraq by the end of the next  year'.  He also declared an end to the U. S.  'combat mission' in Iraq  as of Aug.  31.  But an official acknowledged told IPS that  combat would continue and would not necessarily be confined  to defending against attacks on U. S.  personnel.  The administration decided on the transition from military  to civilian responsibility for security at an interagency  meeting the week of Jul.  19.  It made the broad outlines of  the plan public at an Aug.  16 State Department news briefing  and another briefing the following day, even though crucial  details had not been worked out.  Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defence for Middle Eastern  Affairs Colin Kahl and Deputy Assistant Secretary of State  for Near Eastern Affairs Michael Corbin presented the  administration plan for what they called a 'transition from  a military to civilian relationship' with Iraq.  The plan involves replacing the official U. S.  military  presence in Iraq with a much smaller State Department-run  force of private security contractors.  Press reports have  indicated that the force will number several thousand, and  that it is seeking 29 helicopters, 60 IED-proof personnel  carriers and a fleet of 1,320 armored cars.  The contractor force would also operate radars so it can  call in airstrikes and fly reconnaissance drones, according  to the New York Times Aug.  21.  Kahl argued that the transition is justified by security  trends in Iraq.  He said al Qaeda is 'weaker than it's ever  been', that Moqtada al Sadr's Mahdi Army has been 'largely  disbanded', and that there is no strategic threat to the  regime.  That provoked predictable criticism from those whose careers  have become linked to the fate of the U. S.  military in Iraq  and who continue to view the United States as having  enormous power to decide the fate of the country.  Kenneth Pollack of the Brookings Institution, a frequent  visitor to Iraq at the invitation of Gen.  David Petraeus and  his successor Gen.  Ray Odierno, dismissed the idea of giving  the former U. S.  military role in Iraq to the State  Department and Kahl's assessment of security trends as far  too optimistic.  Some officials were talking 'as if we're on the five-yard  line,' Pollack told the Christian Science Monitor.  'We're on  more like the 40 — and it's probably our 40. 'Pollack argued that the U. S.  has great influence in Iraq,  which it must use for 'persuading' Iraqi leaders to do  various things.  If the U. S.  troop presence ends in 2011, he  argued, that U. S.  power would suffer. Other variants of that argument were offered by Stephen  Biddle of the Council on Foreign Relations and Michael  O'Hanlon of the Brookings Institution, both of whom have  been frequent guests of the U. S.  command in Iraq and have  generally hewed to the military view of Iraq policy. Former ambassador to Iraq Ryan Crocker, who shared the media  spotlight and adulation of Congress with Petraeus in 2007- 2009 before retiring from the Foreign Service, opined that  the military needs to keep enough presence in Iraq to  encourage Iraq's generals to stay out of politics.  The real position of the administration over the issue is  not much different from that of its critics, however.  In  answer to a question after a briefing Aug. 17, Kahl said,  'We're not going to abandon them.  We're in this for the long  term. ' Then Kahl observed, 'Iraq is not going to need tens of  thousands of [American] forces. ' That is consistent with the  figure of 5,000 to 10,000 being called for by the military,  according to the administration official quoted in New York  Times Aug.  18. At another point, Kahl said, 'We'll just have to see what  the Iraqi government will do,' adding that the 'vast  majority of political actors in Iraq want a long-term  partnership with the United States. 'It is been generally assumed among U. S.  officers and  diplomats and the Iraqi officials with whom they talk that  once a new Iraqi government is agreed on, it will begin  talks on a longer-term U. S.  troop presence, as former  National Security Council official Brett H.  McGurk told the  New York Times last month. At a Pentagon press conference Feb.  22, Gen.  Odierno, U. S.   overall commander in Iraq, referred to the purchase by the  Iraqi government of 'significant amounts of military  material from the United States,' including M1A1 tanks and  helicopters.  Odierno said he expected it would require a 'small  contingent' to 'train and advise' the Iraqis.  That formula  implicitly anticipated a continuation of the U. S.  combat  presence in the guise of 'advisory and assistance' units. But the administration apparently made it clear to Odierno  and others that they were not to contradict the  administration's public posture that U. S.  troops were being  withdrawn by the end of 2011.  During the interagency meeting that adopted the Obama  administration transition plan, Odierno told reporters at a  breakfast meeting Jul.  21 he expected U. S.  troops to be down  to zero by the end of 2011.  Meanwhile, the Nouri al-Maliki government is not admitting  publicly that it would consider such an extension of the  U. S.  troop presence.  The spokesman for al-Maliki said Aug.   12 there are alternatives to keeping U. S.  troops in the  country, such as signing 'non-aggression and non- interference pacts' with neighbours. *Gareth Porter is an investigative historian and journalist  specialising in U. S.  national security policy.  The paperback  edition of his latest book, 'Perils of Dominance: Imbalance  of Power and the Road to War in Vietnam', was published in  2006. 