A U. N.  human rights investigation mission will be launched in  the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC) Wednesday,  U. N.  officials announced Tuesday, after gruesome reports  surfaced in the media of the systematic gang rape of nearly  200 women in a 21km stretch of 15 villages. A joint U. N.  human rights team verified the perpetrators as  Democratic Liberation Forces of Rwanda and Mai Mai Cheka  rebel groups.  U. N.  Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon's  spokesperson Martin Nesirky said in a briefing that the  victims of the raid are currently receiving medical and  psycho-social care. 'This is another example of both the level of sexual  violence and the insecurity that continue to plague the  DRC,' Nesirky said in a statement. According to Will F.  Cragin of the International Medical  Corps, between Jul.  30 and Aug.  3, an estimated 200 to 400  armed men descended on the town of Luvungi in the North Kivu  province of the DRC, a mineral-rich area plagued by rebel  groups who routinely loot and pillage villages and terrorise  the population.  Most women were raped by two to six men, and in front of  their families in their homes, Cragin said.  But the  brutality of this occurrence is all too common: According to  a joint Oxfam and Harvard Humanitarian Initiative report  released in April, 60 percent of rape victims in the DRC  were gang raped, mostly by soldiers, and mostly at home. Margot Wallstrom, Ban's Special Representative on Sexual  Violence and Conflict, has previously referred to the DRC as  the 'rape capital' of the world.  Over 200,000 women have  been raped in the Central African nation over the last 14  years of conflict — a statistic Wallstrom said was  'certainly an underestimate' in an interview with IPS last  month. Wallstrom will be leading the U. N. 's response and follow-up  to the mass rapes, Nesirky announced today.  In addition, the  secretary-general is dispatching Assistant Secretary-General  Atul Khare of the U. N.  Department of Peacekeeping Operations  to the DRC. 'The sexual violence in Congo is the result of the war  between the many armed groups.  To put women in the front  line has become a part of modern warfare,' Wallstrom told  IPS last month.  'In addition, there is almost total impunity  for rape in the Congo. 'In separate statements Tuesday, Wallstrom and Ban condemned  the raid in the strongest terms possible.  'This terrible  incident confirms my general findings during my recent visit  to the DRC of the widespread and systematic nature of rape  and other human rights violations,' Wallstrom said. Meanwhile, U. N.  peacekeepers maintain a presence in the area  through its mission, MONUSCO, which the Security Council in  May voted to draw down by 2,000 troops in the western part  of the country.  The U. N.  says that last year, 8,000 cases of rape were  reported in the DRC - an undoubtedly low estimate, given the  number of incidents that go unreported. Aware of the DRC's reputation for cases of sexual violence  against women, U. N.  peacekeepers in the country had adjusted  their operations in an attempt to prevent sexual violence,  Wallstrom told IPS, such as through special patrols and the  escort of women to health clinics and markets.  However,  these escort patrols, Nesirky explained, were not routine,  but only took place if requested. The town of Luvungi is just 16 kilometres away from the  nearest U. N.  military camp, according to Cragin.  Bunangiri,  another town affected by the four-day raid, is 30 kilometres  away from a MONUSCO operating base, which Nesirky said was  never informed of the incident by either the population or  the local authorities. Nesirky added that the rebel groups had blocked the main  road in an effort to prevent villagers from reaching the  nearest communication point to the base. However, the Associated Press reported that 25 U. N.   peacekeepers were present in the community during the raid,  but failed to prevent it. 'When the peacekeepers approached a village, the rebels  would run into the forest, but then the Blue Helmets had to  move on to another area, and the rebels would just return,'  said Charles Masudi Kisa, a civil society leader. Nesirky told IPS that the U. N.  was aware of these media  reports, and stressed that investigations into the incident  were still ongoing.  He said that the MONUSCO office in North Kivu received  reports of the raid from an international medical NGO on  Aug.  12.  The following day, a joint protection team was  deployed to the area for four days.  On Aug.  14, the North  Kivu MONUSCO brigade launched a fact-finding mission.  A  fully-fledged humanitarian investigation mission will be  launched Wednesday. 'Clearly, if the U. N.  mission on the ground becomes aware of  an incident of this nature it will want to move very quickly  to help those who have suffered, and also to investigate  exactly what happened,' Nesirky told IPS.  'There is, if you  like, a twin track to help those who have been subjected to  this incident, raped, and also to track down — with the help  of the legitimate armed forces of the Democratic Republic of  the Congo — the perpetrators. '