Charging that U. S.  private security contractors are 'mafia- like groups' being financed by U. S.  taxpayers to carry out  'terrorist activities' with the support of the U. S.   government, Afghan President Hamid Karzai has ordered a four- month phaseout of all private security companies in his  embattled country. Asserting his oft-challenged authority as the country's  chief executive, Karzai's move, if implemented, would likely  change the security landscape in Afghanistan.  Critics are  saying it would be likely to result in potential delays of  many foreign projects and undermine the strategy being  followed by top U. S.  commanded in Afghanistan, Gen.  David  Petraeus.  Economic organisations such as the World Bank, and compounds  of embassies, consulates, nongovernmental organisations,  would be exempted from the rule.  But it appears clear that Karzai's hostility toward U. S.   contractors is fuelled by their impact on domestic Afghan  politics.  Attacks by U. S.  drones and other forces have  resulted in the killing of innocent Afghanistan civilians.  This has not only turned into hostility by Afghans toward  U. S.  and allied troops, but it puts at peril the strategy  announced by the new U. S.  military commander in Afghanistan,  Gen.  David Petraeus.  That strategy depends on the military  courting Afghan civilians by protecting them from the  Taliban and improving the government services they receive. In a related development, Xe Services, the private military  company formerly known as Blackwater Worldwide, has agreed  with the U. S.  State Department to pay 42 million dollars in  fines for hundreds of violations of United States export  control regulations, after allegedly illegally sending  weapons to Afghanistan and training international civilians  to be soldiers. The latter charge includes making unauthorised proposals to  train troops in south Sudan and providing sniper training  for Taiwanese police officers.  The company is said to be pleased with the settlement, which  will allow it to continue to get government contracts. However, the settlement does not resolve other legal issues  the company is facing.  Five former Blackwater executives are  under indictment executives on weapons and obstruction  charges.  In a related development, the Iraqi government said it plans  to seize weapons from foreign security firms and expel ex- Blackwater contractors still in the country, according to  Interior Minister Jawad al-Bolani.  The decision was triggered by the Iraqi government's outrage  over the dismissal by a U. S.  court of charges against  Blackwater Worldwide guards who were accused of killing 14  Iraqi civilians in Baghdad in 2007.  The guards said they  shot in self-defense. The judge said there was evidence of prosecutorial  misconduct.  The U. S.  government is appealing the dismissal  of the court case.  The Iraqi government, which has  prohibited Blackwater from operating in Iraq, has hired U. S.   lawyers to prepare a lawsuit against the company.  For many Iraqis, the killing of the 14 civilians became  emblematic of the impunity from prosecution in Iraq enjoyed  by foreign security contractors after the 2003 U. S.   invasion.  That immunity ended last year under a U. S. -Iraqi  security agreement transferring sovereignty back to Iraq. Karzai took the challenge to U. S.  and NATO influence over  his much-criticized government to the American airways over  the weekend.  During an appearance on ABC's 'This Week,' he  pressed for the removal of the vast majority of U. S.  private  contractors by the end of this year.  He said their continued  presence inside Afghanistan was 'an obstruction and  impediment' to the country's growth, a waste of money, and a  trigger for corruption among Afghan officials.  He added, 'One of the reasons that I want them disbanded and  removed by four months from now is exactly because their  presence is preventing the growth and development of the  Afghan security forces - especially the police force -  because if 40, 50,000 people are given more salaries than  the Afghan police, why would an Afghan . . .  man come to the  police if he can get a job in a security firm, have a lot of  leeway without any discipline? So naturally our security  forces will find it difficult to grow.  In order for our  security forces to grow these groups must be disbanded. 'Karzai's proposal drew cautious support from Senator John  Kerry, Democrat of Massachusetts and chairman of the Senate  Foreign Relations Committee, who was on a two-day visit to  Afghanistan.  Kerry said a reorganization of the country's  security was called for.  'It is in (President Karzai's) interest to build his own  security capacity as fast as possible,' Kerry said, adding  that it was also in the U. S. 's interest.  However, he said,  the timetable would need to be worked out. But, according to U. S.  officials, Afghanistan's army and  police are not yet ready to take up the roles now played by  private security contractors.  If anything, the corruption  that Karzai sees in the contractor corps could get worse if  the Afghan army - itself a reported haven for corruption -  is now asked to take on an even larger role.  Yet Karzai said, 'I'm appealing to the U. S.  taxpayer not to  allow their hard earned money to be wasted on groups that  are not only providing lots of inconvenience to the Afghan  people but are actually, god knows, in contract with mafia- like groups and perhaps also funding militants, and  insurgents and terrorists with those funds. '