A mother accused of backing insurgents in the Philippines and  her newborn son are awaiting their release from prison, in a  case that has gained international attention. Amaryllis Enriquez, the head of Karapatan, an alliance of  individuals and organisations that investigate human rights  cases, told IPS a new motion was filed Monday by the lawyers  of Judilyn Oliveros, who gave birth in July and was brought  back to prison last week after the court denied an appeal to  extend her temporary release for six months to nurse her  baby. Oliveros is among a group of 43 people - two doctors, one  registered nurse, two midwives and 38 volunteer health  workers - who were arrested on Feb.  6 for the illegal  possession of explosives and firearms.  Five have allegedly  admitted to being members of the New People's Army (NPA) but  Karapatan stands behind all 43, insisting that they were  tortured into confessing. The NPA is the armed wing of the Communist Party in the  Philippines, which has been waging an insurgency since 1969. The police and military operative responsible for the arrest  claim to have seized three grenades, improvised landmines, a  pistol with seven bullets and C4 explosives from the  residence of Dr.  Melecia Velmonte, an infectious disease  specialist who is one of the detained.  The military charge that the so-called Morong 43 serve as  medical assistants to the guerilla platoons of the NPA.  'The  government forces were able to prevent a possible major  attack to be perpetrated by the NPA bandits during its  anniversary,' says the press release issued by the  Philippine army. The Morong 43 counter that they had gathered for a health  training session and that the warrant issued was defective  because it did not contain any of the names of those who  were arrested. The prisoners deny allegations of ties to the NPA, and  instead claim membership to a joint initiative led by two  NGOs, the Community Medicine Development Foundation (COMMED)  and the Council for Health and Development (CHD).  These  community health workers administer services otherwise  unavailable when a natural disaster strikes or where medical  services are unaffordable to the community. Enriquez explained to IPS that the police were searching for  someone by the name of Mario Condes, and that the warrant  did not specify an address but in effect covered the entire  neighbourhood. 'When they rounded up the Morong 43, there was no Mario  Condes.  The commissioner asked the arresting officer — so  you haven't got Condes but are you still looking for him?  'No sir', was his response,' said Enriquez. The police and the army dismiss accusations that the warrant  was invalid, arguing that they had undertaken extensive  intelligence and surveillance work and that the search had  occurred in the presence of a caretaker and two local  government officials. Given the presence of explosives and other devices, their  work must not be limited to attending to the health concerns  of the NPA, said Lt.  Col.  Marcelo Burgos Jr. , the Army  spokesman. This is not the first time the military has targeted health  workers.  Enriquez says the arrest is linked to a larger  operation at stake for the government - its  counterinsurgency initiative to eliminate armed  revolutionary movements.  Known as Operation Freedom Watch,  the previous administration of Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo has  committed the military to a 2010 deadline to eliminate  communist insurgency in the country. Karapatan documents that the crackdown has resulted in 1,206  extrajudicial killings, 205 people disappeared, and many  more subjected to torture. A habeas corpus petition was filed but dismissed by the  Court of Appeals, which ruled that it could not release the  detainees under the presumption of an illegal detention  because they had been charged with a criminal offence in the  local court. The Free the 43 campaign, which calls for the immediate and  unconditional release of the Morong 43, has been taking its  message to the international stage, where Enriquez and the  husband of one of the prisoners brought the case to the  attention of the U. N.  Human Rights Council last June. Enriquez also helped launch a campaign at this year's  CIVICUS World Assembly, which took place from Aug.  20-23, a  platform where civil society organisations can build  partnerships to solve global issues and address human rights  abuses. 'We are partners in a project at CIVICUS called the Early  Warning system, which acts as an urgent alert to sound out a  situation in our country and enables civil society  organisations across the world to respond to the threats  against civil society,' Enriquez told IPS.  'We would like to  pressure CIVICUS to do more.  We also hope that the new  president, [Benigno] 'Noynoy' Aquino, will respond to  increased pressure from our international supporters. '