As details emerged this week of the U. N. 's knowledge of rebel  activity in the villages where nearly 200 women were  systematically gang raped by armed groups in the eastern  Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC) late last month, human  rights groups are demanding an investigation into the U. N. 's  failure to prevent the raid from occurring. 'These scandalous, outrageous atrocities should serve as a  wake up call for the international community,' Marcel  Stoessel, Oxfam International's country director in the DRC,  told IPS in a phone interview. Amnesty International echoed Oxfam's sentiments, calling for  a critical investigation of the U. N. 's inaction. 'The DRC government and the United Nations must urgently  review the failures to protect civilians to prevent such  horrors from being inflicted again,' Amnesty International  said in a statement. Amnesty also urged the immediate gathering and preservation  of evidence in order to bring the perpetrators to justice. Legally, the responsibility to arrest and prosecute the  perpetrators of the mass rapes lies with the weak and often  ineffective Congolese government, which has been under  mounting pressure to capture and try the individuals  responsible. A spokesperson for the U. N.  said that a team has been  deployed to investigate the incident, and is expected to  finish its work by the beginning of September.  The Congolese  government, however, is not involved. Another official of a human rights group admitted that the  rebels were not likely to be apprehended, much less  prosecuted.  He cited a leaked U. N.  report, revealed by Le  Monde on Wednesday, which accuses the government of Rwanda  of war crimes, including possibly genocide, in the DRC as  reflecting the history of violence in the region since 1993. 'The report shows that impunity has been the norm,' he told  IPS.  'In this particular case,' he said, referring to the  mass rapes, 'it's not, unfortunately, going to be the  exception. 'The conflict-ridden DRC has been ranked the number five  failed state by Foreign Policy for the last two years,  worsening two spots since 2007.  Rape is systematically used  as a tool of war, with about one case of rape reported every  hour — the perpetrators of which are usually armed men from  rebel groups or the regular Congolese army, according to  Amnesty. 'The government doesn't have a presence, indeed authority,  over the entire territory, which makes it possible for armed  groups to commit these atrocities,' Stoessel told IPS.  'And  even when the Congolese army is present, they are often  themselves not a protective force and are perpetrators. 'Given the DRC's instability, in 1999 the U. N.  sent a  peacekeeping force to the country, now called MONUSCO, which  is charged with the protection of civilians.  This week, it  was revealed that MONUSCO failed to act despite knowledge of  the rebels' presence in the villages, and failed to respond  timely after eventually receiving information of the mass  rapes. The Security Council held an emergency meeting about the  mass rapes Thursday, after which Russian Ambassador Vitaly  Churkin and U. S.  Ambassador Susan Rice expressed indignation  at the number of questions that remain outstanding regarding  the U. N. 's response to the incident on the ground. 'We're horrified and we're outraged,' Rice said.  'It was a  disturbing briefing both for what we learned and what we  don't know still. 'Between Jul.  30 and Aug.  3, 200 to 400 armed men allegedly  from the Democratic Liberation Forces of Rwanda (FDLR) and  the Mai Mai Cheka rebel groups ravaged a cluster of villages  in the DRC's North Kivu province.  One of the villages was  just 20 kilometres away from a MONUSCO forward operating  base. A day after the raid began, MONUSCO received information of  rebel activity in the villages.  Robert Meece, the U. N. 's top  official for the country, told reporters on Wednesday that  there was no indication of an attack.  However, the same day,  an e-mail was sent to U. N.  staff urging them to stay away  from the area because the situation was too dangerous, the  New York Times reported Wednesday. Despite this, MONUSCO did not visit the villages until Aug.   2.  At this point, the raid was still taking place, but  according to Meece, the peacekeepers were not informed of  the violence occurring.  This alarming lack of contact has  raised questions about MONUSCO's procedures during their  visits and their efficacy in communicating with the very  people they are charged to protect.  'They need to get out of their vehicles, go on foot patrols  right close to these most vulnerable communities and deploy  strategically where civilians are most at risk,' Stoessel  said of the peacekeepers. Another patrol took place Aug.  4, but Meece noted it went in  the opposite direction of the villages.  'Visits alone are not sufficient — that was the clear  feeling of members of the Security Council,' Churkin told  reporters after the council meeting.  'Every other day, once  a week, is not sufficient for having reliable information. 'Peacekeepers did not return to the affected area until Aug.   9, Meece said — over a week after MONUSCO learned of the  rebels' presence in the villages and three days after the  International Medical Corps (IMC) says it alerted the U. N. 's  office of humanitarian affairs of the mass rapes.  CNN  reported Thursday that the IMC informed the U. N.  of the raid  on Aug.  6, disputing official U. N.  claims that it did not  have knowledge of the rapes until Aug.  12. In response to revelations of the mass gang rapes this week,  U. N.  Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon dispatched Atul Khare,  deputy head of the U. N.  peacekeeping department, and Margot  Wallstrom, his special representative on sexual violence in  conflict to the DRC.  They are expected back in New York on  Sep.  8 and will brief the Security Council. 'We are looking forward to the return of Mr.  Khare and a  very serious, sober evaluation — as one council member put  it — of what happened and why.  Clearly not everything worked  the way it should have worked under these circumstances,'  Churkin said.  'We are going to get to the bottom of it. '