In an effort to introduce a story of 'progress' into media coverage, Gen.  David  Petraeus’s command claimed last week that the Taliban is suffering from  reduced morale in Marjah and elsewhere, despite evidence that the population of  Marjah still believes the Taliban controls that district. But the news media ignored the command’s handout on the story, which did  not quote Petraeus. The International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) Aug.  25 news release quoted  German Brig.  Gen.  Josef Blotz, the ISAF spokesman, as citing intelligence  reports of 'low insurgent morale, which is affecting their capability across the  country. 'The release claimed that the Taliban commander in Marjah district, Mullah  Niamat, 'openly acknowledged to his fellow insurgents that the Taliban is  losing Marjah and their chances of winning are poor. 'The release cited 'intelligence reports' as saying the Taliban leader’s  assessment was 'based on battle losses' and 'increased resentment of the  insurgent methods by average Afghans'. In response to a request from IPS for details that would substantiate the  claim, however, ISAF was unwilling to do so.   The allegation about Marjah is contradicted by a report of a survey conducted  by the London-based International Council on Security and Development  (ICOS) showing that the population of Marjah still regarded the Taliban as  being in control of the district five months after U. S.  troops began occupying  it. The ICOS report, is based on 522 interviews with men in Helmand and  Kandahar provinces in July - 97 of which were in Marjah district.   It shows  that 88 of the 97 interviewed in Marjah believe the Taliban controlled the  district, whereas only 9 perceive the government as being in controlIf the population of Marjah is 'resentful' of Taliban tactics, moreover, they are  evidently far more resentful of U. S.  tactics in the district.   Asked whether the  military operation by U. S. -NATO forces in their area was 'good or bad for the  Afghan people,' only 1 of the 97 people said it was good; the other 96 said it  was bad. ICOS is an international policy think tank focused on issues security,  development, counter-narcotics and health. In response to an IPS query about exactly what Mullah Niamat is alleged to  have said, Lt.  Col.  John Dorrian, an ISAF public affairs officer, declined to  provide any further information about just what Niamat had actually said.  He  cited the need to protect 'our counterintelligence tactics and techniques. 'Dorrian claimed there was other evidence, obtained from discussions with  detainees, among other means, to support the claim of reduced Taliban  morale.  He declined, however, to provide any further details. Even though the news media have thus far refrained from challenging any of  Petraeus’s claims of progress, not a single news outlet thus far has picked up  the ISAF press release’s claim of lower insurgent morale. The alleged admission of incipient defeat by Mullah Niamat and the refusal to  provide any direct quotes or other specifics recall another alleged statement  by an adversary used by Petraeus’s staff in Iraq to make a key political point. On Jul.  2, 2007, Petraeus’s spokesman in Iraq, Gen.  Kevin Bergner, told  reporters that a Hezbollah detainee, Ali Musa Daqduq, had revealed to  interrogators that he been tasked with organizing 'special groups' in Iraq for  Iran. The story of Daqduq’s alleged admission was part of a larger charge by the  U. S.  command in Iraq that Iran had organized and was arming and training  Shi’a militia groups that had allegedly broken away from Moqtada al Sadr’s  Mahdi Army. But Bergner provided no direct quotes from Daqduq to reporters.  And in May  2008, another public affairs officer, Col.  Donald Bacon, told Associated Press  in an e-mail that the Hezbollah operative had actually told interrogators that  his role in Iraq was to 'assess the quality of training and make  recommendations on how the training could be improved. 'In fact, as military and intelligence officials privately admitted to pro-war  blogger Bill Roggio, the term 'special groups' was not an Iranian designation  at all; it was created by the U. S.  command and applied to any Mahdi Army  military commanders and troops who refused to cooperate with the U. S.   military. Both episodes illustrate efforts by the military command to shape the media  narrative surrounding the war, as advocated by Petraeus in his 2006 army  manual on counterinsurgency. Noting that the media 'directly influence the attitude of key audiences toward  counterinsurgents', Petraeus referred to 'a war of perceptions between  insurgents and counterinsurgents conducted continuously using the news  media. 'Petraeus urged counterinsurgency war 'leaders' to carry out 'information  operations' to 'obtain local, regional and international support for COIN  operations'. The decision to promote a story that was likely to encounter scepticism in the  press corps in Afghanistan appears to be a response by Petraeus to a looming  crisis over his ability to convince the Barack Obama administration that  progress is being achieved in the war. The claim came two days after Petraeus asserted in a BBC interview that the  U. S. —NATO war had 'already reversed the momentum which the Taliban had  built up in the last few years in Helmand and Kandahar provinces and around  Kabul. ' In fact, however, U. S.  operations in Marjah had failed to expel the Taliban  fighters or to reduce their political influence in the district.   Nor has Petraeus  claimed that Kandahar will be secured by the end of this year as previously  vowed by McChrystal — or even by the mid-2011.   To make matters worse for Petraeus, over the past six months, the Taliban  have continued to establish a politically dominant presence in more areas of  northern Afghanistan which had previously been judged relatively secure. The Washington Post’s Joshua Partlow reported Aug.  15 - the same day  Petraeus was making his claim of progress - that Taliban fighters were  'spreading like a brush fire into remote and defenceless villages across  northern Afghanistan'. Two weeks earlier, Alissa J.  Rubin of the New York Times had quoted the  chairman of the provincial council in Baghlan province as saying the situation  there was 'very serious and day by day it is getting worse and worse. 'The bad news about Taliban gains in control of territory in the northern  provinces is likely to be reflected in the next Pentagon assessment of the war  due to be published in late November — just before Petraeus’s pivotal  December review of progress in the war. *Gareth Porter is an investigative historian and journalist specialising in U. S.   national security policy.  The paperback edition of his latest book, 'Perils of  Dominance: Imbalance of Power and the Road to War in Vietnam', was  published in 2006. 