Two of the nation’s most influential human rights organisations have filed a  lawsuit challenging the government’s authority to carry out 'targeted killings' of  U. S.  citizens located far from any armed conflict zone. The American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU) and the Center for Constitutional  Rights (CCR) charge that the authority contemplated by the Obama  administration is far broader than what the Constitution and international law  allow. The organisations claim that, 'outside of armed conflict, both the Constitution  and international law prohibit targeted killing except as a last resort to protect  against concrete, specific, and imminent threats of death or serious physical  injury.  An extrajudicial killing policy under which names are added to CIA and  military ‘kill lists’ through a secret executive process and stay there for  months at a time is plainly not limited to imminent threats. 'The CCR and the ACLU were retained by Nasser al-Awlaki to bring the lawsuit  in connection with the government’s decision to authorise the targeted killing  of his son, U. S.  citizen Anwar al-Awlaki, whom the CIA and Defense  Department have marked for death. The complaint asks a court to rule that using lethal force far from any  battlefield and without judicial process is illegal in all but the narrowest  circumstances; and to prohibit the government from carrying out targeted  killings except in compliance with these standards.  It also asks the court to  order the government to disclose the standards it uses to place U. S.  citizens  on government kill lists. Anwar al-Awlaki, 39, was born in Las Cruces, New Mexico, and is an Islamic  lecturer who is a dual citizen of the U. S.  and Yemen.  He is a spiritual leader  and former imam who has purportedly inspired Islamic terrorists.  His sermons  are said to have been attended by three of the 9/11 hijackers. Today’s lawsuit was filed against the CIA, Defense Department and the  president in the U. S.  District Court for the District of Columbia. According to the complaint, the government has not disclosed the standards  it uses for authorising the premeditated and deliberate killing of U. S.  citizens  located far from any battlefield.  The groups argue that the American people  are entitled to know the standards being used for these life and death  decisions. 'The United States cannot simply execute people, including its own citizens,  anywhere in the world based on its own say-so,' said Vince Warren, Executive  Director of CCR.  'The law prohibits the government from killing without trial  or conviction other than in the face of an imminent threat that leaves no time  for deliberation or due process.  That the government adds people to kill lists  after a bureaucratic process and leaves them on the lists for months at a time  flies in the face of the Constitution and international law. 'The groups charge that targeting individuals for execution who are suspected  of terrorism but have not been convicted or even charged - without oversight,  judicial process or disclosed standards for placement on kill lists - also poses  the risk that the government will erroneously target the wrong people.  In  recent years, the U. S.  government has detained many men as terrorists, only  for courts or the government itself to discover later that the evidence was  wrong or unreliable. But a top Obama counterterrorism official is defending the government’s right  to target U. S.  citizens perceived as terror threats for capture or killing, citing  al-Awlaki as an example. Michael Leiter, director of the National Counterterrorism Center, does not say  whether al-Awlaki is on a U. S.  targeting list, but a senior U. S.   counterterrorism official has previously confirmed that the cleric is among  terror targets sought to be captured or killed. What does the law say about targeting and killing people?Much of the discussion thus far has been about the Constitutionality of such  killings.  But, counter-intuitively, the Constitution is not the primary engine.  It  is largely the laws of war that are in play here. Daphne Eviatar of Human Rights First (HRF) explains to IPS, 'Whether the  target is a citizen isn’t so important, because he’s targetable if he’s an enemy  belligerent or civilian who’s directly participating in hostilities against the  United States. 'She adds, 'The problem with the government’s drone program is that it hasn’t  provided the public with enough information to determine whether the  government is complying with those legal requirements.  The fact that  someone is suspected of having ties to al Qaeda or even supporting al Qaeda  does not make them a member of a foreign force fighting the United States,  or someone directly participating in hostilities against the United States. ''Until the U. S.  starts providing information about not only who they’re  targeting but what evidence exists that this person is a legitimate target, then  we can’t know if what they’re doing is legal,' she says. Scott Horton, a constitutional lawyer and contributing editor at ‘Harper’s  Magazine’, tells IPS, 'There are two ways the government can justify the  extrajudicial killing of an American citizen: one is when the person is in the  act of a crime that threatens the lives of others, or serious injury to them, and  no other means exists to stop him; the other is in the context of a war. ' 'The Obama Administration appears to think that the second case is  applicable with respect to al-Awlaki, but if they have evidence to prove it,  they certainly haven’t advanced it to the public,' he says. But even if they have such evidence, he adds, 'they haven't explained why  they don’t simply have him arrested and brought back to stand charges based  on the crimes they believe he has committed, which appear to include terrorist  activities and perhaps treason.  They obviously need to explain why that  approach won’t work before they go dropping bombs in circumstances that  might kill large numbers of innocent civilians in addition to killing al-Awlaki,'  Horton tells IPS. Col.  Morris Davis, the Defense Department’s former chief prosecutor for  terrorism cases who argued on behalf of a terrorism suspect that the military  justice system has been corrupted by politics and inappropriate influence  from senior Pentagon officials, tells IPS:'The 5th Amendment says U. S.  citizens can’t be ‘deprived of life, liberty, or  property without due process of law. ’ If the Constitution prohibits the  government from taking your house without giving you a hearing and the  opportunity to defend yourself, it seems rather ironic that they might take  your life with even less formality and less process. 'Glenn Greenwald, constitutional lawyer and contributor to Salon. com, is  similarly troubled by the targeting policy.  He concludes: 'We really are talking  about a President who believes he has the right to send the CIA to murder  American citizens based purely on allegations and suspicions of wrongdoing. '