Twenty-eight minors have been documented as victims of last month's four-day  raid of more than a dozen villages centred around Walikale, Democratic Republic  of the Congo (DRC), U. N.  officials told reporters here today.  Children, including  one 12-years old boy were identified.  The Walikale victim toll has risen to over  240. Following the Jul.  30 to Aug.  3 raid, rebels are now believed to have continued  their pillaging spree in neighbouring areas.  75 rape victims have been  identified in Mubi and Pinga, in addition to the more than 240 Walikale  victims. As a result of the observed increase in violence and in an effort to reassure  and protect the population, the U. N.  peacekeeping force in the DRC  (MONUSCO) and the 121st brigade of the Congolese military are boosting  their presence in the affected areas, according to a statement released today  by MONUSCO.  Helicopters have also been dispatched for surveillance over the  concerned areas.  Additionally, the Congolese military 'has opened an investigation.  One  suspect has already been apprehended,' the statement said.  Although the  U. N.  maintains a presence in the DRC, the legal burden to arrest and  prosecute the perpetrators of the mass rapes lies with the Congolese  government.  Victims left in the wake of the rebels’ violence have gradually come forward  as the Congolese military is able to secure their villages and the rebels retreat,  U. N.  spokesperson Farhan Haq told IPS.  The U. N.  has identified the perpetrators as members of the Democratic Forces  for the Liberation of Rwanda (FDLR) and Mai Mai Cheka - rebel groups that  regularly terrorise the mineral-rich eastern DRC region, looting villages and  systematically gang raping women and children as a tool of war.  MONUSCO was informed of the additional rapes following the Walikale raid by  aid groups who provided care to the victims.  The U. N.  is currently conducting its own non-criminal investigation, jointly  headed by its human rights office and MONUSCO, 'to try to establish the facts  related to the U. N. ’s mission on the ground, to learn from that and also, in so  doing, to try to establish… what actually happened,' U. N.  spokesperson  Martin Nesirqy told IPS.  The U. N.  and MONUSCO have come under fire since news of the mass gang  rapes first broke early last week - for their failure to prevent the raid despite  having knowledge of rebel activity in the villages.  The primary mandate of the  one billion dollar MONUSCO force, the world body’s largest peacekeeping  presence worldwide, is the protection of civilians.  Eighty peacekeepers patrol the densely wooded 300 square kilometre area  encompassing Walikale - a number, the U. N.  says, is insufficient.  'They can’t  be behind every bush,' outgoing U. N.  humanitarian chief John Holmes told  reporters here last week.  U. N.  agencies knew of rebel activity and one reported rape in the Walikale area  when the raid began on Jul.  30, and knew of 24 more rapes by Aug.  10, ‘The  New York Times’ reported today, disputing earlier claims by officials that the  U. N.  did not have knowledge of rapes of any scale until Aug.  12.  A MONUSCO patrol did not pass through the villages until Aug.  2.  At this  time, the raid was still occurring, but U. N.  officials say that the peacekeepers  received no indication of the rebels’ presence, or of the mass rapes during  their visit.  Meanwhile, the DRC government insists that it doesn’t need U. N.   peacekeepers, who have been in the country since 1999 after a ceasefire was  brokered between warring factions in the central African region.  Kinshasa has expressed its desire for the MONUSCO mandate - which expires  next summer - not to be extended, and has sought a drawdown of U. N.  forces  in the DRC.  Nearly 2,000 blue helmets stationed in the relatively stable  western part of the country were sent home in June.  But aid groups claim that the DRC’s security forces are incapable of providing  peace and stability to its citizens.  The Congolese army has itself been  reported to perpetrate human rights abuses, including systematic rape of the  civilian population.  As a result, 'as long as the Congolese armed forces are in a state of  indiscipline where they are themselves a threat to the population and women,  mostly… MONUSCO is the best hope to protect civilians,' Marcel Stoessel, DRC  country director for Amnesty International told IPS.  But in the long run, Stoessel said, the way to ensure an end to the impunity  for human rights abuses, like sexual violence, committed in the conflict-  ridden DRC is comprehensive security sector reform.  'MONUSCO cannot be a long-term solution,' Stoessel told IPS. (*Adds information released Sep.  3 regarding minors victimised in the raids.   Story first moved Sep.  1, 2010)