The U. N.  Security Council is considering leveraging sanctions  against the perpetrators of the mass rapes that occurred last  month in the eastern Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC)  following a meeting held on the recent violence Tuesday. 'From the U. S.  point of view, we will take up the mantle of  leadership… in ensuring that the perpetrators of the  violence are held accountable, including through our efforts  in the sanctions committee — to add them to the list that  exists and to ensure that they are sanctioned,' U. S.   Ambassador Susan Rice told reporters after the meeting. Over 500 rapes have now been confirmed in the North and  South Kivu provinces since Jul.  30, with scores more  unconfirmed and still others certainly unreported, according  to the deputy head of the U. N.  peacekeeping department, Atul  Khare, who briefed the council during the meeting.  Khare was  dispatched to the DRC after reports of the recent violence  in the country surfaced in the media two weeks ago. Members of the Democratic Liberation Forces of Rwanda, known  by their French acronym FDLR, and the Mai Mai Cheka rebel  groups systematically gang raped over 242 women during a  four-day raid of 13 villages in the North Kivu province  beginning Jul.  30.  According to MONUSCO, the U. N. 's  peacekeeping force in the DRC, they are believed to have  continued their pillaging spree after 75 subsequent rapes  were confirmed in neighbouring areas. And in South Kivu, over 214 rapes of men, women and children  as young as seven years old have been confirmed, with  reports of the systematic rape of every woman in the village  of Kiluma yet to be corroborated, Khare said.  Included in  this figure are 10 rapes committed by the official Congolese  armed forces, known as the FARDC. Members of the FARDC, a largely undisciplined military, are  known to commit human rights abuses themselves.  One of the  most notorious examples is former rebel commander Bosco  Ntaganda, who is wanted for war crimes by the International  Criminal Court, yet is still currently a general in the  FARDC, according to aid groups. 'This has been an issue that the council has been seized  with for years,' Rice said.  'Focusing on the FARDC is not  new. ' Khare and Margot Wallstrom, the U. N. 's special  representative for sexual violence in conflict, also urged  the use of targeted sanctions against the FDLR and Mai Mai  Cheka as a crucial first step in ending impunity for sexual  violence and human rights abuses in the conflict-ridden  country.  However, DRC Ambassador Ileka Atoki believes that  sanctions will be futile. 'Delegations will be tempted to seek the easy way out — that  would be to establish an entire series of sanctions that… in  the depths of the equatorial forest will have no impact and  will be entirely ineffective and would not be able to bring  relief to us from this horror that we, the men and women of  the Congo, have been in… for more than a decade,' Atoki said  during the council meeting. Marcel Stoessel, Oxfam International country director for  the DRC, told IPS that the only long-term solution to  impunity is an overhaul of its security sector.  The DRC has  instituted a zero-tolerance policy for sexual violence, yet  systematic rape is still a common occurrence.  'The government must walk their talk,' Stoessel told IPS.   'The international community must also show true commitment…  There is no willingness by the government or a coordinated  effort by donor countries [for comprehensive security sector  reform], yet these are the only real solutions to avoid  these kinds of atrocities we have seen. 'Meanwhile, the U. N.  has come under fire for failing to  prevent the Jul.  30 to Aug.  2 raid despite knowledge on the  first day of rebel activity in the area and at least one  reported rape.  Peacekeepers also passed through the affected  villages on the last day of the raid, but were not alerted  to the violence, generating dialogue during the council  meeting of enhancing communication and early-warning  capabilities.  According to Khare, the densely wooded area in question  lacks cell phone coverage, has only one interpreter and only  one satellite phone.  'While the primary responsibility for protection of  civilians lies with the state, its national army and police  force, clearly, we have also failed,' Khare admitted.  'Our  actions were not adequate, resulting in unacceptable  brutalisation of the population of the villages in the area.   We must do better. 'The one-billion-dollar MONUSCO force has the strongest  mandate to protect civilians among the world body's  peacekeeping troops and is the largest.  Yet, when the  council renewed its mandate in May, it was with the  understanding that the mission would be downsized and  eventually phased out, at the wishes of the DRC government.   Two thousand blue helmets were removed from the more stable  western part of the country beginning in June. 'If [the peacekeepers] don't act, we don't need them,' Atoki  told IPS after the meeting.  'We don't need 10,000 tourists  in the DRC. 'An assessment of the need for MONUSCO has been ongoing since  the council renewed its mandate.  On the basis of this  assessment process, U. N.  Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon is  due to submit a report on the 'reconfiguration' of  peacekeeping forces in the DRC to the Security Council in  early October. 'The process has demonstrated the need for a cautious  approach regarding the next stages of the drawdown of the  mission,' Khare told council members. Additionally, Khare acknowledged that while one rape is too  many, the numbers reported thus far are not unusual.  Some  15,000 rapes were reported in the country in both 2008 and  2009, he told the reporters after the meeting, which equates  to over 41 rapes per day, or about 1,233 rapes per month. 'For [the women of the DRC], there is no safe place,'  Wallstrom said.  'They are raped when harvesting crops; when  going to market; when fetching water and firewood; when  carrying their babies; when in their homes at night, among  their loved ones.  Rape does not end when the violence is  over. '