Amid continued high levels of violence and a steady stream of  reports of high-level government corruption in Kabul, a  growing number of foreign policy specialists are urging  President Barack Obama to reconsider his counterinsurgency  (COIN) strategy in Afghanistan. In a new report released here Wednesday, a bipartisan group  of some three dozen former senior officials, academics, and  policy analysts argued that the administration's ambitious  'nation-building' efforts in Afghanistan are costing too  much in U. S.  blood and treasure and that, in any event,  '(p)rospects for success are dim. 'Calling for an accelerated timetable for reducing the U. S.   military presence there, the 'Afghanistan Study Group',  which also urged intensified efforts to reach a negotiated  solution with the Pashtun-based Taliban, echoed many of the  points made in the latest strategic survey which was  released by the International Institute for Strategic  Studies (IISS) in London Tuesday. '(A)s the military surge reaches its peak and begins to wind  down, it is necessary and advisable for outside powers to  move to a containment and deterrence policy to deal with the  international terrorist threat from the Afghan/Pakistan  border regions,' said IISS's director-general, John Chipman,  in introducing this year's report. 'At present the COIN strategy is too ambitious, too removed  from the core security goals that need to be met, and too  sapping of diplomatic and military energies needed both in  the region and elsewhere,' he noted.  '(F)or Western states  to be pinned down militarily and psychologically in  Afghanistan will not be in the service of their wider  political and security interests. ' The two reports come amid growing public scepticism both in  the United States and its European and NATO partners — two  of which, Canada and the Netherlands, have just withdrawn  all of their troops - about the course of the war, which  will soon mark its ninth anniversary.  Currently costing U. S.   taxpayers 100 billion dollars a year, the Afghan war became  the longest in U. S.  history earlier this summer, when it  exceeded the Vietnam conflict. Despite the appointment in June of Gen.  David Petraeus, the  author of the U. S.  COIN strategy in Iraq, to head U. S.  and  coalition forces in Afghanistan, two out of three  respondents in a recent CNN poll said they believed  Washington was 'not winning' the war.  Half said the war  could not be won.  Sixty-eight percent of respondents in a Wall Street  Journal/NBC poll taken last month said they were 'less  confident' that the war will be brought to a 'successful  conclusion' — a striking increase from the 58 percent who  took that view last December.  Only 23 percent said they were  'more confident'. The increasingly sour mood is no doubt due in part to the  preoccupation with the economy and growing political support  in both parties for cutting the yawning government deficit,  of which the 100 billion dollars spent on Afghanistan is not  an insignificant part. But the persistent high casualty rates - this year's total  U. S.  military death toll, 331, already exceeds 2009's record  high of 317 - has also contributed to the growing popular  conviction that the war is simply not worth the cost.  Meanwhile, the virtually daily reports of high-level  corruption in the government of President Hamid Karzai —  this past week, major stories have featured the run on the  politically well-connected Bank of Kabul — have persuaded a  growing number of people, including members of the foreign  policy elite and even a number of normally hawkish  Republicans, that Washington simply lacks the kind of local  partner that any true COIN campaign requires in order to  prevail. Released as Congress returns to Washington after the long  August recess, the Afghanistan Study Group's report,  entitled 'A New Way Forward: Rethinking U. S.  Strategy in  Afghanistan', appears designed to provoke debate about U. S.   policy during the mid-term election campaign and in the run- up to a formal review in December by the Obama  administration itself of how its COIN strategy is faring.   On the advice of Petraeus and the Pentagon, Obama has  increased the number of U. S.  troops deployed to Afghanistan  from some 35,000 when he took office to around 100,000  today.  He has vowed to begin withdrawing troops in July  2011, although the pace at which they will be withdrawn has  not yet been determined and remains a source of considerable  contention within the administration. The administration has indeed been split for some time.  The  so-called COINistas have argued for a major 'nation- building' effort combined with a military campaign directed  against the Taliban which they depict as inseparable from al  Qaeda.  Others within the administration, reportedly led by  Vice President Joseph Biden, have argued for a less  ambitious counterterrorism campaign (CT) aimed more narrowly  against al Qaeda on both sides of the Afghan-Pakistan  border. In that respect, the Study Group, whose membership spanned  the political spectrum from the Democratic left to the  libertarian right but was weighted most heavily towards  'realists' who, until George W.  Bush generally dominated the  post-World War II foreign policy elite, is aligned more  closely with the CT advocates. Quoting arch-realist Henry Kissinger, the report noted that  'Afghanistan has never been pacified by foreign forces,' and  that '(w)aging a lengthy counterinsurgency war in  Afghanistan may well do more to aid Taliban recruiting than  to dismantle the group, help spread conflict further into  Pakistan, unify radical groups that might otherwise be  quarrelling amongst themselves, threaten the long-term  health of the U. S.  economy, and prevent the U. S.  government  from turning its full attention to other pressing problems. ''We've been creating enemies faster than friends,' noted  Paul Pillar, who served as the CIA's National Intelligence  Officer for the Middle East and South Asia from 2000 to  2005, at the report's release at the New America Foundation  (NAF).  Complaining of a 'disconnect' between the conduct of  the war and U. S.  aim of destroying and disabling al Qaeda,  he described the U. S.  intervention in Afghanistan as 'a  nine-year-long mission creep'. The report called instead for a five-pronged strategy that  would 'fast-track a peace process designed to decentralise  power within Afghanistan and encourage a power-sharing  balance among the principal parties'; intensify diplomatic  efforts with Afghanistan's neighbours and others 'to  guarantee Afghan neutrality and foster regional stability';  and lead an international effort to develop the country's  economy. Obama, it said, should 'firmly stick to his pledge to begin  withdrawing U. S.  forces in the summer of 2011 — and earlier  if possible.  U. S.  force levels should decline to the minimum  level needed to help train Afghan security forces, prevent  massive human rights atrocities, resist an expansion of  Taliban control beyond the Pashtun south, and engage in  robust counter-terrorism operations as needed. 'In particular, U. S.  forces should maintain their  capabilities 'to seek out known Al Qaeda cells in the region  and be ready to go after them should they attempt to  relocate elsewhere or build new training facilities,' the  report said.  'Al Qaeda is no longer a significant presence  in Afghanistan, and there are only some 400 hard-core Al  Qaeda members remaining in the entire Af/Pak theatre, most  of them hiding in Pakistan's northwest provinces. 'Besides Pillar, other signers of the report included Gordon  Adams, a top White House budget official for national  security under the Clinton administration who is currently  with the Stimson Center; Steve Clemons, the head of NAF's  American Security programme; Patrick Cronin, a senior  advisor at the Center for a New American Security; W.   Patrick Lang, who served as the top Middle East/South Asia  officer in the Pentagon's Defence Intelligence Agency during  the 1990s; Selig Harrison, an Afghan specialist at the  Center for International Policy; and Stephen Walt, a Harvard  University scholar considered a leader of the 'realist'  school of international relations. *Jim Lobe's blog on U. S.  foreign policy can be read at  http://www. lobelog. com. 