Gen.  David Petraeus claimed limited success this week in the  war within a war over the Taliban's planting of roadside  bombs, but official Pentagon data shows the Taliban clearly  winning that war by planting more bombs and killing many more  U. S.  and NATO troops since the troop surge began in early  2010. In an interview with the Wall Street Journal published  Tuesday, Petraeus asserted that the use of improvised  explosive devices (IEDs) by the Taliban had 'flattened' over  the past year and attributed that alleged success to  pressures by the U. S.  military, and especially the increased  tempo of Special Operations Forces raids against Taliban  units.  Data provided by the Pentagon's Joint IED Defeat  Organization (JIEDDO), however, shows that IEDs planted by  Afghan insurgents killed nearly 40 percent more U. S.  and  NATO troops in the first eight months of 2010 than in the  comparable period of 2009.  The data also show that Taliban IEDs wounded 2,025 U. S.  and  NATO troops in the first eight months of this year — almost  twice the 1,035 wounded in the same months last year. In the Journal interview, Petraeus said that the data on  violent incidents in Afghanistan indicate a slowly improving  security situation. Without putting his statement in quotation marks, Journal  reporters Julian E.  Barnes and Matthew Rosenberg reported  Petraeus as claiming that the use of IEDs 'has generally  flattened in the past year'.  While crediting U. S.  military  operations with this alleged improvement, Petraeus said it  is too soon to say that they are the sole reason for this  alleged flattening of IED incidents.  But the data for 2009 and 2010 provide no support for  Petraeus's 'flattened' description.  The 12-month moving average of IED incidents, provided in a  report in July by the Center for Strategic and International  Studies on the basis of JIEDDO data, shows a continuing and  sharp increase from 250 in June 2009 to more than 900 in May  2010, for an average increase per month of 54 incidents.  The total number of IED incidents in Afghanistan began to  rise steeply in March 2010 to a new high of 1,087 and then  continued to climb to 1,128 in May and again to 1,258 in  August.  In a related effort to spin the IED issue more favourably to  the war effort, Maj.  Michael G.  Johnson, a spokesman for the  International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) commanded by  Petraeus, was quoted in a USA Today story published Tuesday  as saying that there had been a 'dip' in deaths and injuries  from IEDs over the previous 12 weeks compared to the same  period in 2009. But the JIEDDO figures on deaths and injuries to U. S.  and  NATO forces from IEDs from June through August 2010 total  271 casualties - a 30 percent increase over the total for  those months a year ago. In response to a query from IPS, however, Johnson said he  was including deaths and injuries to Afghan security  personnel and civilians as well.  Killing and wounding foreign troops is generally understood  to be the objective of the Taliban's IED war and the  reduction of those casualties is the objective of Petraeus's  command. Petraeus had previously been more cautious about claiming  success in the IED war.  In an interview with Spencer  Ackerman of the website Danger Room Aug.  18, Petraeus only  referred to growing pressures on the Taliban organising for  IEDs from both U. S.  intelligence, surveillance and  reconnaissance systems and from SOF units.  But when Ackerman pointed out that IED attacks were rising,  Petraeus asserted that the increase could be because U. S.   and coalition forces are 'on the offensive…taking away areas  that matter to the enemy, safe havens and sanctuaries. ' Challenged by Ackerman on an interpretation that turned an  obvious indicator of a failing war effort into an indicator  of progress, however, Petraeus retreated, saying, 'That's  fair enough. ' Both the Ackerman interview and Johnson's statement  illustrate the Petraeus tactic of making statements that  mislead by omission or tendentious interpretation rather  than making statements that could be proven false.  The Petraeus statement to the Journal about 'flattened' IED  figures, however, appears to go beyond that tactic. The JIEDDO data on IED incidents by month also provides  evidence that the U. S.  and NATO forces have failed to win  the trust of the population in the Pashtun provinces where  the Taliban have been strongest.  The JIEDDO figures show  that the proportion of IEDs turned in by the population has  continued to fall with each passing year since the NATO  military buildup in Pashtun areas began in 2006. In late 2005, the civilian population was informing U. S.  and  NATO troops of about 15 percent of of all IEDs planted.  That  proportion fell to just over nine percent in 2006, to less  than seven percent in 2007 to about three percent in 2008,  and again to 2. 8 percent in 2009.  In the first six months of 2010, that ratio dropped to 2. 6  percent, and in May and June it fell to 1. 4 and one percent,  respectively. A paper by four authors, including former Petraeus adviser  David Kilcullen, published by the pro-war Center for New  American Security in June 2009 highlighted the importance of  the proportion of IEDs turned in by the population as an  indicator of good relations between U. S.  and NATO military  units and the local population.  A rise in the proportion of IEDs found and cleared,  especially because of tips from the population, would be a  'sign of progress', the authors concluded.  The head of JIEDDO, Lt.  Gen.  Michael Oates, appears to agree  with that analysis.  In an interview with USA Today published  last March, Oates said winning the trust of the Afghan  population is 'a key ingredient' in protecting U. S.  troops  from IEDs.  The steep decline in the proportion of IEDs turned in by the  population as more U. S.  and NATO troops intruded on the  Pashtun countryside is another reliable indicator —  supporting opinion surveys in Helmand and Kandahar provinces  — of the deterioration of relations between foreign troops  and the population. *Gareth Porter is an investigative historian and journalist  specialising in U. S.  national security policy.  The paperback  edition of his latest book, 'Perils of Dominance: Imbalance  of Power and the Road to War in Vietnam', was published in  2006. 