U. N Secretary General Ban Ki-moon returned Thursday from what  has been described as a damage control trip to Rwanda, in an  attempt to reassure President Paul Kagame that his concerns  over the recently leaked Mapping Exercise report are being  heard. During Ban's hastily arranged trip to the Rwandan capital  Kigali, he met Kagame and a number of ministers, including  Minister of Foreign Affairs Louise Mushikiwabo, who last  week threatened to pull Rwandan peacekeeping troops out of  Darfur should the final draft contain allegations of  genocide. The 600-page Mapping Exercise report, prepared by the Office  of the U. N.  High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR),  accuses Rwandan military forces and an allied rebel group of  carrying out widespread human rights violations which could  amount to genocide.   It contains descriptions of over 600 atrocities which  occurred in the period between March 1993 and June 2003,  allegedly committed by Rwandan troops against Rwandan Hutu  fighters who fled to the Democratic Republic of Congo after  the 1994 genocide. The report documents a number of violent attacks on  civilians, including women and children. An official with a human rights group, who asked not to be  named, told IPS that it also had information of violence in  DRC, directed not towards individuals but towards particular  ethnic groups. 'The report seems to be very well researched and detailed.   In light of the widespread ethnic violence, accusations of  genocide seem like a normal conclusion,' he said. Mushikiwabo, who is being considered by Ban as possible head  of a new U. N agency dealing with women's empowerment and  gender equality, strongly criticised the U. N. 's inquiry into  Rwanda's alleged war crimes, claiming that the report was  'fatally flawed' and that it was 'patently absurd for the  U. N. , which deliberately turned its back on the Rwandan  people during the 1994 genocide, to accuse the army that  stopped the genocide of committing atrocities in the  Democratic Republic of Congo. 'Gregory Stanton, president and founder of Genocide Watch,  told IPS that the U. S.  State Department knew of reports of  mass killings of Hutus as early as 1996.  When Stanton pushed  for further investigation into the matter, however, he said  he was told by the Central African Affairs Coordinator at  the State Department to 'stop asking questions'. 'Ethnic violence in DRC has been going on for more than a  decade, so accusations of genocide ring true.  No government  should go unpunished for committing such acts,' Stanton  said. Ban told reporters Thursday that he had encouraged Kagame,  the Rwandan government and all concerned countries to submit  their comments by the end of the month, so they can be  released simultaneously to the final version of the report,  whose publication has been delayed until Oct.  1.  He  commended Rwanda's efforts and the great strides it has made  towards achieving the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs). He also congratulated Kagame, who will co-chair an MDG  advocacy group in New York next month, on his inauguration  for a third seven-year term as president.  Kagame, who has  been in power for 16 years, won a landslide reelection last  month amid allegations of fraud and violent repression of  the opposition. Many candidates were not allowed to take part, while three  politicians who had criticised the government in the past  were attacked in suspicious circumstances in the months  leading up to the elections. Ban, who was accompanied to Kigali by his special envoy to  the Congo Roger Meece, U. N peacekeeping chief Alain Le Roy  and U. N.  assistant secretary general for human rights Ivan  Simonovic, told reporters he had listened to the  government's concerns and he 'fully understands and  appreciates the depth of their feelings on the matter'. He also praised Rwanda's commitment to the U. N.  agenda and  its role in peacekeeping operations, especially in Sudan,  and complimented Rwandan forces for being 'well trained and  highly disciplined'. The threat of Rwanda pulling out of peacekeeping operations  in Sudan is one the U. N.  must take seriously.  Rwandans make  up the largest contingent of the peacekeeping forces in  Darfur, and contribute over 3,000 troops to peacekeeping  missions all over the world. This episode has highlighted how much power a relatively  small country can yield when it contributes a large number  of troops to U. N.  peacekeeping operations. There are speculations, in part prompted by the delayed  publication of the report, that Ban may seek to remove any  mention of genocide from the finalised version of the  Mapping Exercise, in order to stop Rwanda from leaving  peacekeeping operations. The official told IPS that his NGO would like to see the  report published in its entirety and without changes, adding  that 'it would be embarrassing for the U. N.  if the report  was changed as results of threats from the Rwandan  government'. He echoed a number of other NGOs in expressing his hopes  that the Congolese and Rwandan governments, along with the  U. N.  and other international actors, will follow up on the  findings of the report and work together to bring to justice  the perpetrators of these acts. 