In the shadowy global network of arms traffickers, Victor Bout enjoyed a special  place, according to Western intelligence sources.  He was the poster boy, the  kingpin, the lord of this deadly illegal trade. But the 43-year-old former Soviet military translator dismisses such  descriptions, preferring instead to be known as a Russian businessman who  owned a fleet of planes that transported cargo to the world’s trouble spots,  where wars raged.  Yet as he languishes in a Thai jail awaiting a possible flight to the United  States to face criminal charges, another side of Bout is as relevant — the over a  decade-long streak he has enjoyed escaping the law, always being one step  ahead of U. S.  and international law enforcement officials.  His luck, however, appeared to have run out in March 2008, when he was  arrested in a swanky Bangkok hotel in a sting operation that included U. S.   agents posing off as arms buyers from the Revolutionary Armed Forces of  Columbia (FARC).  Last month it appeared that Washington finally had their man.  Thailand’s  appeals court ruled in mid-August that Bout could be extradited, paving the  way for the Russian to appear before a U. S.  court to face charges that  included a conspiracy to kill U. S.  citizens and providing support to FARC,  which Washington has labelled a terrorist group.  Yet Bout still remains in the Thai jail following fresh charges that the U. S.   government brought against him, including money laundering.  A court date  has been fixed on Oct.  4, although Washington, in a bid to get Bout in its  clutches, has asked the Thai Attorney General’s office to drop these new  charges.  Little wonder why analysts familiar with the likes of Bout are still reluctant to  rule that luck has finally run out for the man who inspired the 2005 film ‘Lord  of War’, starring Nicholas Cage.  Prosecuting arms traffickers has been a  difficult challenge, they say. World arms traffickers have operated since the collapse of the Cold War.  They  are neither government agents supplying weapons to support proxy wars  across Asia, Africa or Latin America nor 'rouge' elements transporting  weapons across national boundaries as individual operatives.    'A significant proportion of grey-market arms trafficking is connected to  states,' says Anthony Davis, a Bangkok-based security analyst of IHS-Jane’s,  a military information group.  'Individuals like Bout enjoy links to, and in many  cases (enjoy) the protection of, states.  It is a mistake to portray them as rouge  criminal elements. '  'It is difficult today to make a clear-cut distinction between private operatives  and the state in this business, because the privateers generally need to clear  consignments with state intelligence services,' he tells IPS.  'They are very  much tied into state networks of weapons producers and intelligence  services. 'With such protection and an absence of political will, arms traffickers have  been able to enjoy wide latitude to operate, Davis confirms.  'We don’t see  very much political determination to bring these people to justice. ' Weak international laws have also permitted a trade across international  boundaries by traffickers who, besides Russia, come from China, Israel, South  Africa, Syria and the U. S.  'It is a multinational cast of characters.  They do function under the radar,'  says Kathi Austin, an arms trafficking expert who has followed Bout’s career  for 15 years. But the Russian, who was arrested in Bangkok for allegedly offering to sell  FARC surface-to-air-missiles, AK-47s, C-4 explosives and landmines, was  'one of the best entrepreneurs in the arms trade,' reveals Austin.  'He built a  business empire. ' The 1990s saw an explosion of civil wars in Africa that provided a 'business  opportunity' for Bout, she adds.  'He was supplying arms for gold and for  diamonds in the Congo.  He was also an arms trafficker who supplied weapons  during the Rwanda genocide. ' Bout’s business dealings, by reportedly tapping into the arsenals of the  former Soviet Union, also involved the much publicised case of former  Liberian President Charles Taylor, currently facing justice at a war crimes  tribunal for his role in Sierra Leone’s civil war during the 1990s.  In 2000, the elusive Bout was accused in a U. N.  report on Angola of breaking  arms embargoes to supply weapons to the African country’s UNITA rebels.   That year also saw him charged with forging documents in the Central African  Republic and convicted in absentia.  Bout, who is fluent in six languages, operated a fleet of planes that carried  weapons to hot spots like Africa.  He had flown missions for the U. S.   government in Iraq even after he was blacklisted in Washington.  He had also  been reportedly hired by the United Nations for the latter’s operations in  conflict-torn Somalia. When asked by IPS, the U. N. ’s spokesperson in New York refused to deny or  confirm Bout’s link to the world body.  But Alla Bout, wife of the jailed Russian,  says, 'Victor’s planes also worked for the U. N. 'Yet this picture of ‘The Merchant of Death’, the title of a 2007 book about  Bout, co-authored by U. S.  national Douglas Farah, is far from the image that  Alla has been trying to project as she defends her husband’s innocence. 'American charges against me supporting terrorism and illegal arms dealings  are entirely a fabrication of U. S.  intelligence,' she read from a statement  prepared by her husband to a packed press conference in the Thai capital  recently.  'The U. S.  is trying to create an image of me as an illegal arms dealer.   I have never traded weapons. ' 'My husband is innocent,' added Alla.  'He owned a legitimate air cargo  business and worked with governments.  Arms were carried, but they had  nothing to do with the arms trade. ' 