Despite an unusual dip in global weapons sales in 2009, the  United States retained its spot as the world's top arms  supplier of developing countries, according to an  authoritative new report by the Congressional Research Service  (CRS). The report, the latest in an annual series produced by CRS  on conventional arms sales, was released Monday as the Wall  Street Journal reported that the Pentagon will ask Congress  as early as next week to approve a record 60-billion-dollar  sale of jet fighters and helicopters to Saudi Arabia. The proposed sale, which could be supplemented by an  additional 30-billion-dollar deal to upgrade the Saudi  kingdom's naval forces and yet another for new missile- defence systems, would not only consolidate Washington's  position as the world's dominant arms provider.  It would also by itself exceed the value of all conventional  arms transfers agreements signed worldwide by developing and  developed countries alike in 2009 — 57. 5 billion dollars,  according to the CRS report — and would easily restore Saudi  Arabia's status as the developing world's biggest arms  consumer, a position from which it was dethroned in 2009 by  new arms agreements signed by Brazil and Venezuela. 'Sixty billion dollars is about half of what the Pentagon  spends on weapons every year,' said William Hartung, a  veteran arms-sales analyst at the New America Foundation.   'It's a huge bail-out for the military contractors who are  facing a period when Pentagon spending is levelling off. 'The report, which is prepared each year by CRS's top arms  expert, Richard Grimmett, is widely considered to be one of  the most authoritative on the conventional arms trade  because it is based on classified information, as well as  public data, and its methodology has remained consistent for  nearly three decades.  Its statistics include both military  sales and assistance. As in previous reports, the latest distinguishes between  arms agreements that were signed during the previous year  and actual arms deliveries that took place during the same  year.  Actual deliveries often fall short of what agreements  originally called for. This year's report, 'Conventional Arms Transfers to  Developing Nations, 2002-2009,' found that arms transfers to  developing countries made up nearly 80 percent of the 57. 5  billion dollars in all arms transfer orders signed worldwide  during 2009.  The 45. 1 billion dollars in new deals in 2009 was down from  48. 8 billion dollars in contracts for 2008, consistent with  a more general decline in global arms sales of about 8. 5  percent.  '…(T)he clear decline in all arms orders collectively in  2009 reflects, in part, the effect of the international  recession' that broke out in late 2008, the study said. The impact of the recession on arms sales was particularly  evident with respect to actual arms deliveries last year,  the report noted.  The value of all arms deliveries to  developing nations fell just short of 17 billion dollars, it  found.  That was the lowest total since the early 1990s and  down from 20 billion dollars in 2008. In both new arms agreements and in actual deliveries, the  U. S.  served as the top supplier to developing countries in  2009, as it has overall since 2002, according to the report. It signed new arms agreements worth 17. 4 dollars — or 38. 5  percent of all such deals — in 2009; ahead of Russia,  Washington's chief arms-sales rival for the past two  decades, which landed 10. 4 billion dollars worth of new  deals; and third-place finisher France, which signed 7. 1  billion dollars in new contracts, according to the report.  Despite claiming the top spot, Washington's percentage of  new deals fell sharply from 2008, when it accounted for some  60 percent - or 29. 5 billion dollars - of all transfers to  the developing world. In actual arms deliveries to developing nations, Washington  accounted for 7. 4 billion dollars, or 43. 6 percent of all  such deliveries.  Russia ranked second with 3. 5 billion dollars' worth of  deliveries, or 20. 6 percent, while China ranked third at 1. 8  billion dollars, or just over 10 percent.  They were followed  by Germany (1 billion dollars), Britain (800 million  dollars), and Israel (700 million dollars), which has  emerged over the past eight years as the world's seventh  biggest supplier of weapons to developing countries,  according to the report. Among the recipients of new arms transfers, Latin America  beat out both the Near East and Asia — which have  traditionally dominated the consumer list — to top the  rankings in 2009.  With 7. 2 billion dollars in purchases, primarily of  warplanes, Brazil ranked number one among the leading  recipients last year, followed by Venezuela, with 6. 4  billion dollars' worth of new arms deals.  With 4. 3 billion dollars in new agreements, Saudi Arabia  took third place.  It was followed by Taiwan (3. 8 billion  dollars), the United Arab Emirates (3. 6 billion dollars),  Iraq (3. 3 billion dollars, Egypt (3. 0 billion dollars),  Vietnam (2. 4 billion dollars), India (2. 4 billion dollars),  and Kuwait (1. 6 billion dollars). For the entire period 2002-2009, Saudi Arabia ranked first  with 39. 9 billion dollars in signing new arms deals,  followed by India (32. 4 billion dollars), the UAE (17. 3  billion dollars), Egypt (13. 9 billion dollars), and  Venezuela (12. 7 billion dollars). As for actual deliveries in 2009, Saudi Arabia also ranked  first, with 2. 7 billion dollars; China, second at 1. 5  billion dollars; South Korea, third (1. 4 billion dollars);  and Egypt, fourth (1. 3 billion dollars).  They were followed  by India and Israel (1. 2 billion dollars); Pakistan (1. 0  billion dollars), Venezuela and Algeria (900 million  dollars), and Iraq (800 million dollars). For the period 2002-2009, Saudi Arabia dominated the market,  with 31. 5 billion dollars in actual arms deliveries — or a  little over half of what the Pentagon is now proposing to  sell in new aircraft.  China and India each received around 14. 3 billion dollars in  weapons (much of it Russian-made) over the same eight years,  while U. S. -supplied Egypt (12. 2 billion dollars) and Israel  (10. 1 billion dollars) have claimed the fourth and fifth  spots, followed by UAE, Taiwan, South Korea, and Pakistan,  according to the report. Despite its massive arms purchases - including the pending  deal that, if it goes through, will dwarf its predecessors -  Saudi Arabia has not had much occasion to demonstrate its  military prowess.  Late last year, it suffered unexpectedly  high losses in battles against Houthi rebels along its  border with Yemen. 'From a practical point of view, these kinds of purchases  have never been very effective,' said Hartung, who noted  that the sales to the Saudis appear to be aimed 'more at  buying a relationship with the U. S. 'Congress is not expected to oppose the proposed aircraft  sale, which would save or create some 75,000 jobs across the  country.  Israel has also reportedly gone along with the deal after  receiving assurances that the aircraft involved, notably the  F-15, will not be equipped with long-range missile systems.   In addition, the administration is supporting Israel's bid  to buy top-of-the-line F-35 fighter jets, which are one  generation beyond the F-15. 'It's almost like we're running this little arms race  between Israel and Saudi Arabia,' noted Hartung, who added  that sale's sheer size will also likely increase tensions  with Iran which may in turn be tempted to buy warplanes from  Russia.  'This deal is good for the companies, even if isn't  good for the region. '*Jim Lobe's blog on U. S.  foreign policy can be read at  http://www. lobelog. com. 