The U. S.  transfer of Iraqi detainees to national authorities  with a long record of human rights abuses could prove illegal  under international law, Amnesty International cautioned in a  new report Tuesday. In preparation for their 2011 withdrawal from Iraq, U. S.   forces have been releasing detainees into the notorious  Iraqi prison system.  All but about 200 have now been  transferred, without any guarantees against torture or ill- treatment, the report says. 'Iraq's security forces have been responsible for  systematically violating detainees' rights and they have  been permitted to do so with impunity,' said Malcolm Smart,  Amnesty International's director for the Middle East and  North Africa, in a statement. 'Yet, the U. S.  authorities, whose own record on detainees'  rights has been so poor, have now handed over thousands of  people detained by U. S.  forces to face this catalogue of  illegality, violence and abuse, abdicating any  responsibility for their human rights,' he added. Despite numerous Iraqi court orders and a 2008 Amnesty Law  requiring the release of uncharged detainees after six or 12  months depending on the case, an estimated 30,000 people  remain under unlawful detention, according to the London- based rights group. Recently transferred detainees face new dangers in Iraqi  custody.  In April, Human Rights Watch revealed the existence  of a secret Baghdad detention facility that practiced  'systematic and routine torture'. Of the 300 men transferred to the Al Rusafa Detention Centre  from the secret facility in the Old Muthanna airport, Human  Rights Watch interviewed 42 prisoners who were consistent in  describing grim conditions.  According to personal accounts  and corresponding physical evidence like scars, prisoners  were hung upside-down, deprived of air, kicked, whipped,  beaten, given electric shocks, and sodomised.  Despite numerous wartime abuses carried out by U. S.  forces  in Iraq, including the torture of prisoners at Abu Ghraib,  some Iraqis say they would prefer U. S.  detention to national  prison. 'Iraqis have become convinced that the occupying Americans  are more merciful than the people of this country,' Abu  Huthaifa, an Iraqi who was in jail, told the Christian  Science Monitor in May. '[When] people leave the prisons, they leave with hatred  toward the government and those leaders who manage to  slander the word 'democracy,'' he said. As U. S.  forces make haste to transfer all security  responsibilities to the Iraqi government, the Amnesty report  criticises both the U. S.  and Iraq for overlooking these  detention abuses. 'U. S.  forces, by transferring individuals to Iraqi detention  facilities where they are clearly at risk of torture and  other ill-treatment, may be complicit in these abuses and  have breached their international obligations towards the  prisoners,' according to the report.  The majority of detainees are Sunni Arabs held under  suspicion of working with armed Sunni groups against U. S.   forces and Iraqi authorities.  But the report also documents  hundreds of Shi'a Muslims suspected of supporting the al- Mahdi Army, a group that has been in armed opposition of the  occupation until recently.  Camp Cropper, near the Baghdad International Airport, is  cited in the Amnesty report as the last prison to switch  from U. S.  to Iraqi control in July 2010. Reporters from the Christian Science Monitor visited the  centre in 2009 when transfers were already taking place.  Col.  John Huey, the commander responsible for the internment  facilities at the camp, recognised that prisoners should be  transferred only to centres run by the Ministry of Justice  because those run by the Interior and Defence Ministries  were far worse.  However, reporters from the Monitor observed  U. S.  soldiers in Diyala transferring prisoners to Interior  Ministry prisons, which was apparently normal procedure. The Amnesty report recommends that Iraq ratify the Rome  Statute creating the International Criminal Court, as well  as the second Additional Protocol to the Geneva Conventions,  and the Optional Protocol of the U. N.  Convention against  Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or  Punishment. 'The Iraqi authorities must take the firm and decisive  action now, at the completion of the handover of prisons to  Iraqi custody, to show that they have the political will to  uphold the human rights of all Iraqis, in accordance with  their international obligations, and to stop the torture and  other gross abuses of detainees' rights that are so  prevalent today,' said Smart. 'Detainees who have been held for long periods without  recognisable criminal charges against them, and without  having been tried, must be released or brought to trial  promptly in full compliance with international standards of  fair trial and without recourse to the death penalty,' he  said. 