During a round of media interviews last month, Gen.  David  Petraeus released totals for the alleged results of nearly  3,000 'night raids' by Special Operations Forces (SOF) units  over the 90 days from May through July: 365 'insurgent  leaders', 1,355 Taliban 'rank and file' fighters captured, and  1,031 killed. Those figures were widely reported as highlighting the  'successes' of SOF raids in at least hurting the Taliban. But a direct correlation between the stepped up night raids  in Kandahar province and a sharp fall-off in the proportion  of IEDs being turned in by the local population indicates  that the raids backfired badly, bolstering the Taliban's  hold on the population in Kandahar province.  Night raids, which are viewed as a violation of the sanctity  of the home and generate large numbers of civilian  casualties, are the single biggest factor in generating  popular anger at U. S.  and NATO forces, as Gen.  Stanley A.   McChrystal conceded in his directive on the issue last  March.  Nevertheless, McChrystal had increased the level of SOF  raids from the 100 to 125 a month during the command of his  predecessor, Gen.  David McKiernan, to 500 a month during  2009.  And the figures released by Petraeus revealed that  McChrystal had doubled the number of raids on homes again to  1,000 a month before he was relieved of duty in June.  The step up in night raids has been overwhelmingly  concentrated on districts in and around Kandahar City.  It  began in April as a prelude to what was then being billed as  the 'make or break' campaign of the war.  The response of the civilian population in those districts  can be discerned from data on the Taliban roadside bombs and  the proportion turned in by the population.  Increasing the  ratio of total IEDs planted found as a result of tips from  the population has been cited as a key indicator of winning  the trust of the local population by Maj.  Gen.  Michael  Oates, head of the Pentagon's Joint IED Defeat Organization  (JIEDDO).  But JIEDDO's monthly statistics on IED's turned in by local  residents as a percentage of total IEDs planted tell a very  different story.  The percentage of Taliban roadside bombs turned in had been  averaging 3. 5 percent from November 2009 through March 2010,  according to official statistics from JIEDDO.  But as soon as  the SOF raids began in Kandahar in April, the percentage of  turn-ins fell precipitously to 1. 5 percent, despite the fact  that the number of IEDs remained about the same as the  previous month. The turn-in ratio continued to average 1. 5 percent through  July.  There is a similar correlation between a sudden increase in  popular anger toward foreign troops in spring 2009 and a  precipitous drop in the rate of turn-ins.  In the first four months of 2009, turn-ins had averaged 4. 5  percent of IED incidents.  But in early May 2009 a U. S.   airstrike in Farah province killed between 97 and 147  civilians, according to the Afghanistan Independent Human  Rights Commission.  As popular outrage over the biggest mass  killing of civilians in the war spread across the country,  the ratio of turn-ins fell to 2. 1 percent of the total for  the month, even though IEDs increased by less than 20  percent. Then McChrystal took command and ordered a quadrupling of  the number of night raids.  The turn-in ratio continued to  average just 2. 2 percent for the next five months.  In Kandahar, as elsewhere in Afghanistan, popular anger at  foreign troops was undoubtedly stoked by the inevitable  killing and detention of the innocent people that  accompanies SOF night raids.  According to the figures released by Petraeus, for every  targeted individual killed or captured in the raids, three  non-targeted individuals were killed and another four were  detained. Based on past cases of false reporting by SOF units, a large  proportion of the 1,031 killed in the raids and identified  as 'insurgents' were simply neighbours who had come out of  their homes with guns when they heard the raiders.  Gen.  McChrystal referred to that chronic problem in a  statement on his directive on night raids last March.   'Instinctive responses' by an Afghan man to 'defend his home  and family are sometimes interpreted as insurgent acts, with  tragic results,' McChyrstal said. SOF units have routinely reported those killed under such  circumstances as insurgents rather than as innocent  civilians.  When an SOF unit raided the home of a low-level commander in  Laghman province on Jan.  26, 2009, 13 men came out of nearby  homes.  They were all killed and later included in the tally  of Taliban reported killed in the raid. The problem of false reporting was brought to light most  dramatically after a botched SOF raid in Gardez Feb.  12,  when two men who emerged from buildings in the compound  targeted by an SOF unit were shot and killed.  Within hours  of the raid, ISAF issued a statement describing the two men  as 'insurgents'.  That falsehood was later revealed only because the two men  happened to be a police official and a government  prosecutor.  In the same incident, the SOF unit accidentally  killed three women, two of whom were pregnant, but reported  to headquarters that the women had been found tied up. McChrystal defended the SOF unit against charges by  eyewitnesses that its members had tried to cover up the  killing, even after the head of the Afghan interior ministry  investigation of the incident publicly declared that the  testimony was credible. The figure of 1,355 insurgents 'captured' in the raids given  out by the International Security Assistance Force is also  highly misleading.  In response to an IPS query about the  figure, ISAF public affairs officer Maj.  Sunset R.  Belinsky  confirmed that the figure 'reflects insurgents or suspected  insurgents captured during operations'. In fact, the vast majority were simply swept up because they  happened to be present in a house or compound targeted in a  raid. An ISAF press release Sep.  8 illustrates how such a larger  number was accumulated.  In a raid on the compound of a  suspected 'insurgent commander' in Paktika province Sep.  7,  the SOF unit ordered all occupants to leave the compound and  detained 'several suspected insurgents' after 'initial  questioning'.  U. S.  forces in Afghanistan have never released figures on  what proportion of Afghans detained as suspected insurgents  were eventually released because of lack of evidence.  Maj.   Gen.  Douglas Stone, who reviewed U. S.  detainee policies in  early 2009, was reported by The Guardian Oct.  14, 2009 to  have concluded that two-thirds of the detainees still being  held by the U. S.  military as Taliban insurgents were  innocent.  The claim of 365 'insurgent leaders' killed or captured is  also highly misleading.  At his confirmation hearing in June, Petraeus referred to  the targets of SOF raids as 'middle and upper level Taliban  and other extremist element leaders'.  That terminology was later abandoned, however.  When  questioned about the figure last month, an ISAF official,  speaking on condition of anonymity, conceded that it was not  clear what authority the targeted 'leaders' had.  There is no  organisational diagram for the Taliban, the official told  IPS, and Taliban fighters are not organised in military  units.  The vast majority of those 'leaders', it appears, were low  level Taliban personnel who are easily replaced.  *Gareth Porter is an investigative historian and journalist  specialising in U. S.  national security policy.  The paperback  edition of his latest book, 'Perils of Dominance: Imbalance  of Power and the Road to War in Vietnam', was published in  2006. 