Less than four months before a scheduled referendum on  independence for southern Sudan, the administration of  President Barack Obama is intensifying pressure on both  Khartoum and the south's leadership to establish the necessary  pre-conditions for the vote and any transition that follows  it. Obama himself will attend a key meeting on Sudan to be  hosted by Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon at U. N.  headquarters  Sep.  24 to highlight the importance of resolving all  outstanding disputes before the vote, Obama's special envoy  on Sudan, ret.  Maj.  Gen.  Scott Gration, told reporters at a  special briefing here Wednesday. Gration, who just returned from his 20th trip to Sudan since  his appointment early last year, also warned the next weeks  represent a 'make-or-break period' for the country. 'We must ensure that the parties find agreements' on the  issues that remain to be settled before the referendum,  which is scheduled to take place in January, he said. They include, among other things, the final demarcation of  the border between the north and the south and the terms for  sharing oil reserves, most of which lie in the south, and  future oil revenues.   In addition, the voter registration  process — a daunting challenge in a vast region that lacks  basic infrastructure - has not yet begun. The stakes are considered very high, indeed.  If the  referendum, which most analysts believe will result in a  strong vote for secession, fails to take place or if the  results are rejected by Khartoum, the civil war that was  halted by the 2005 Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA)  between Khartoum and the Sudanese Peoples Liberation  Movement (SPLM) is considered highly likely to resume.  Some two million people, the vast majority of them  southerners, are believed to have died as a result of that  conflict, which began in 1983 and ended with the signing of  the CPA.  The CPA, considered one of the few major foreign  policy achievements of President George W.  Bush, was  mediated by the U. S. , Britain, and Norway with the help of  Sudan's neighbours and the African Union (AU). In addition to sending Obama to the U. N.  — a move that U. S.   officials hope will draw other heads of state who will be  attending the annual launch of the U. N.  General Assembly to  the meeting — Washington has taken a number of other steps  to ensure that the referendum takes place. Last month, it appointed Bush's former assistant secretary  of state for Africa, veteran diplomat Princeton Lyman, to  lead a U. S.  Negotiation Support Unit in Sudan dedicated to  resolving all pending disputes over the coming weeks.  Lyman's appointment was reportedly backed by forces within  the administration that have expressed growing unhappiness  with Gration, who has been accused, particularly by human  rights and activist groups, of acting in too conciliatory a  manner toward the government of President Omar al-Bashir. Bashir is currently under indictment for war crimes and  genocide by the International Criminal Court in connection  with the government's counterinsurgency campaign in the  western region of Darfur. While Lyman is expected to spend much of his time shuttling  between Khartoum and Juba, the administration has also  ramped up its representation in the southern capital where  it has appointed another veteran diplomat, Amb.  Barrie  Walkley, to lead its efforts there. It has also deployed top officials to convey the seriousness  of Washington's concern.  Just before Gration and Lyman arrived in Sudan late last  week, for example, Secretary of State Hillary Clinton used a  major foreign policy address Sep.  8 to warn that the  situation there was a 'ticking time bomb of enormous  consequence' and suggest that a secession vote was  'inevitable'. 'The real problem is what happens when the inevitable  happens and the referendum is passed and the south declares  independence,' she said.  '…This is going to be a very hard  decision for the north to accept. 'Indeed, Khartoum, whose national budget has become  increasingly reliant on oil revenues, could lose an  estimated 80 percent of its oil reserves and 50 percent of  its oil revenues, not to mention 30-some percent of its  national territory, if the south secedes. 'And so we've got to figure out some ways to make it worth  their while to peacefully accept an independent south, and  for the south to recognise that unless they want more years  of warfare and no chance to build their own new state,  they've got to make some accommodations with the north as  well,' she said. She followed her words with phone calls that evening to  Sudan's two vice-presidents, Ali Othman Mohammed Taha, a  long-time leader of the ruling National Congress Party; and  Salva Kir Mayardit, the leader of the SPLA.  According to  Gration, Obama's national security advisor, ret.  Gen.  James  Jones talked with the two Tuesday this week. Late Tuesday, the State Department also released a 'fact  sheet' detailing its recent diplomatic efforts and, for the  first time, publicly laying out a road map for the steps  Khartoum is expected to take to fully normalise long- strained relations with Washington. In addition to offering an immediate easing of licensing  restrictions that will make it possible to aid local food  production in Sudan, Washington will 'take steps to allow  additional trade and investment' in Sudan's non-oil sectors  if a 'credible, peaceful' referendum takes place on time, it  said. If, in addition, there is agreement on key principles for  'post-referenda arrangements, the United States will support  an exchange of ambassadors,' according to the fact sheet,  which was based on Gration's exchanges in Khartoum. If the CPA is fulfilled and Khartoum resolves its conflicts  with rebel groups in Darfur — a negotiation process  currently being led by Qatar — the administration work with  the legislative branch to lift all remaining bilateral and  multilateral economic and aid sanctions imposed by Congress  against Sudan. On Darfur, which has been largely overshadowed by the  growing concern over a breakdown in the CPA, any accord must  include a 'sustained improvement in security, humanitarian  access (to those who have been displaced by the seven-year- old conflict), and services that improve living conditions  on the ground, (and) full cooperation with UNAMID,' the U. N.   peacekeeping force deployed in Darfur, according to the  sheet. The sheet also said Gration had made clear in his talks that  'there are a range of consequences that will be deployed, if  the situation in Sudan deteriorates or fails to make  progress, including additional sanctions. 'Darfur-related activist groups that have been critical of  Gration praised the administration Wednesday.  'We are encouraged that the plan not only spells out  incentives for steps toward peace, security and  accountability, but also makes clear a range of consequences  will be deployed for failure to make progress,' said Mark  Lotwis, the acting president of the Save Darfur Coalition,  which represents more than 100 humanitarian, faith-based and  human rights groups. 'The intensified Sudan strategy, along with President  Obama's commitment to attend next week's U. N.  summit on  Sudan, indicates the kind of leadership that millions of  concerned Americans have been asking President Obama to  assert,' he said, adding for all the attention focused on  the North-South situation, 'Darfur should remain no less of  a priority. '*Jim Lobe's blog on U. S.  foreign policy can be read at  http://www. lobelog. com. 