Three years after security guards from Blackwater, a private  security contractor working for the U. S.  Department of State,  killed 17 unarmed civilians in Baghdad, a leading human rights  advocacy group is charging that not nearly enough has been  done to improve oversight and accountability of private  contractors abroad. Its findings and recommendations come in a new report,  'State of Affairs: Three Years After Nisoor Square,' issued  by Human Rights First. The author of the report, attorney Melina Milazzo, told IPS  that 'the U. S.  government has not done nearly enough to  protect innocent civilians from trigger-happy contractors. ' She added that it was urgent for Congress and President  Barack Obama to take action before the planned increase in  the number of private security contractors in Iraq and  Afghanistan. Nisoor Square is the major intersection in Baghdad where the  killings took place in September 2007.  Twenty other unarmed  civilians were wounded.  The security contractor involved,  Blackwater Worldwide - which later changed its name to Xe  Services - subsequently was expelled from the country by the  Iraqi government and banned from working there in the  future.  As the U. S.  continues its drawdown of troops in Iraq, the  State Department plans to more than double the number of  private security contractors it employs from 2,700 to 7,000.   An additional 50,000 contractors - primarily working for the  Department of Defence (DOD) - will be required to support  the Afghan war. The HRF report acknowledges that the Nisoor Square incident  triggered some positive reforms in U. S.  law and policy.  For  example, Congress has mandated greater agency oversight and  coordination over private security and other contractors in  Iraq and Afghanistan.  Agencies have also, among other  things, defined their responsibility for contractor  oversight, increased their coordination over contractors,  and established common principles governing contractor  conduct.  But despite that progress, 'serious deficiencies' in U. S.   agencies' reporting, investigation, prosecution and  oversight of serious contractor incidents persist.  Agencies  still do not accurately track the number of contractors and  subcontractors fielded abroad.  Private contractors already  far outnumber U. S.  military forces in Iraq and Afghanistan,  the report charges. 'Many oversight and accountability gaps persist three years  after Nisoor Square, putting civilians at risk and  undermining U. S.  national security,' said HRF's Milazzo, 'Congress and the administration must work together to put  solutions in place before additional contractors are  deployed,' she urged.  Among the report's 19 recommendations: Congress should enact the Civilian Extraterritorial  Jurisdiction Act (CEJA) of 2010 (H. R.  4567, S.  2979) to  expand criminal jurisdiction over and increase investigative  resources for serious crimes committed by U. S.  contractors.  Agencies should require oversight bodies to track all  serious incidents reported, investigate and remediate when  necessary, and maintain all supporting documentation  relating to such actions taken.  The Department of Justice should commit additional resources  to investigate and prosecute contractor crime and formally  announce that prosecution of contractor crime abroad is a  Justice Department national priority.  Publication of the HRF report comes barely a week after the  NATO command issued new guidelines for awarding billions of  dollars worth of international contracts in Afghanistan.  A  memorandum from U. S.  Afghanistan commander David H.  Petraeus  said that without proper oversight, taxpayer funds earmarked  for contractors could end up in the hands of insurgents and  criminals. He added that if 'we spend large quantities of international  contracting funds quickly and with insufficient oversight,  it is likely that some of those funds will unintentionally  fuel corruption, finance insurgent organisations, strengthen  criminal patronage networks and undermine our efforts in  Afghanistan. 'With proper oversight, 'contracting can spur economic  development and support the Afghan government and NATO's  campaign objectives,' Gen.  Petraeus wrote in the  memorandum, which was obtained by the Associated Press. Afghan and foreign private contractors provide a wide range  of services to U. S.  and NATO forces — everything from food  preparation and service to helping to build large capital  projects to providing security escorts to traveling  government officials and VIP civilians.  No official figures are available from the U. S.  government  regarding the exact amount of money paid to contractors.  But  generally accepted estimates put the figure at about 14  billion a year.  Afghan President Hamid Karzai has been outspokenly critical  of individual contractors and of the international  contracting process in general.  He has charged that much of  the money earmarked for important projects is siphoned off  by high-priced contractors, subcontractors and brokers.  The  result, he has said, is that the Afghan people are being  denied the benefits of these projects. As noted by The New York Times, Afghans also complain that  too many contracts are awarded to the same contractors.  This issue was also addressed in Gen.  Petraeus's memorandum.   'Contracts with a broader range of Afghan companies will  help break monopolies and weaken patronage networks that  breed resentment' among the Afghan people, he wrote. He said, 'In situations where there is no alternative to  powerbrokers with links to criminal networks, it may be  preferable to forgo the project. 'The new guidance said that contracts should go to Afghans  first and if the military cannot contract with an Afghan  company, the company that is awarded the contract should be  encouraged to hire Afghan workers and subcontractors.  Blackwater (Xe) recently agreed pay the U. S.  government 42  million dollars for violations that include illegal weapons  export to Afghanistan and making unauthorised proposals to  train troops in southern Sudan, The New York Times has  reported. The company reportedly struck a deal with the U. S.  State  Department to pay the fine in order to avoid criminal  charges.  This will also allow it to continue to obtain  government contracts, including work in Afghanistan. Xe Services still faces other legal troubles, including the  indictment of five former executives on weapons and  obstruction charges.  Two former guards have also been charged with murdering two  Afghan civilians.  According to the Wall Street Journal, Xe's most recent  government contract tasked the group with protecting CIA  bases in Afghanistan.  The report was confirmed by CIA  Director Leon Panetta during a TV interview, the newspaper  wrote.  Blackwater (Xe) has become a kind of poster-child for  suspect business practices in wartime.  During Congressional  hearings last year, it was revealed that the company's  chairman, Erik Prince, has long had close financial and  ideological ties to the administration of former President  George W.  Bush. 