After a lapse of four months, Pukkie Mathika was finally able  to break her silence, finding her way back to a busy  intersection in the heart of an up-market shopping district  here in Bangkok to rage against the Thai government.    She took part in the protest holding up a handmade banner  in deep red, on which was scrawled a message in black text —  the Thai government 'kills people. '   'I do not fear this government,' said the 43-year-old  insurance broker.  'We will not give up. '   She was one of the thousands who filled up the  Rajaprasong intersection on Sep.  19 to reclaim it as their  political stomping ground as they had done from April  through mid-May.  Many held up banners calling for 'justice'  and the 'return to democracy', in addition to chanting  slogans against the government of Thai Prime Minister  Abhisit Vejjajiva.    That such a show of defiance was an illegal act hardly  appeared to trouble the scores of men, women and children at  the protest.  After all, the draconian emergency law, still  enforced in the city, states that a political gathering of  more than five people could lead to arrests.     If anything, the mood of the protesters confirmed that  Thailand was still deeply divided.  The anti-government  sentiments stood in contrast to the messages painted on  nearby billboards, calling on people to 'Reconcile, as we  are one country, one family and one people. '   As night fell, these protesters, who sported the  signature red shirts of their movement, converted the  streets and sidewalks into impromptu shrines.  They lit red  candles to remember the 91 people, the majority of them  protesters, who had been killed during two violent clashes  when Thai troops advanced to wrest back the streets from the  red shirts.    Sunday’s outpouring, which drew close to 10,000 people at  its height, was not only to mark the four-month anniversary  since the red shirt protest ended with a military crackown  on May 19.  Sep.  19 also marked the four-year anniversary of  Thailand’s last military coup.    To many red shirts, the undercurrent of anger in this  South-east Asian kingdom goes back to the moment the  military turfed out then prime minister Thaksin Shinawatra  in September 2006.  Thaksin, a widely popular and twice- elected leader, was viewed by pro-royalist, conservative  elite as a threat to the entrenched order where they had,  till his rise, enjoyed most of the political spoils.    Just how powerful the Thai military establishment has  become four years after the coup is reflected the size of  its budget since its return to calling the political shots  after an interval of 14 years.  The military budget has  swollen from 85 billion baht (2. 4 billion U. S.  dollars) in  2006 to 154 billion baht (4. 96 billion U. S.  dollars) in  2010, reveals the ‘Bangkok Post’ in its Sunday edition.    The military’s role angers women like Wanfasuay  Pattarachainant.  'I have protested since the coup,' said the  61-year-old.  'We need to demonstrate, to show the government  and the military that we disagree with their every action. '   The red shirt movement emerged in the aftermath of the  coup, drawing supporters of the ousted Thaksin who were  angered that their electoral choice had been forced out of  power.  It drew wide support from the rural rice growing  provinces in the north-east, a Thaksin stronghold.    In mid-March, tens of thousands of red shirts began  demonstrating in two iconic areas of Bangkok to force the  government to dissolve Parliament and call for an early  election.  But a crackdown, which saw shots fired by the  military and a shadowy group of ‘black shirts’ from within  red shirt ranks, brought to an end the largest public  protests in nearly two decades.    But the leader of Sunday’s sudden burst of discontent  sees the act of defiance as a reminder to the Abhisit  administration that the red shirts will not remain quiet.    'We want to remember what happened and we want people not  to be afraid of wearing their red shirts in public,' says  Sombat Boonngamanong, a grassroots activist.  'People have  been scared of wearing our political symbol, the red shirts,  since the May crackdown. '   'We need to stand up and show the public who we are,' he  explained to IPS.  'There is symbolism that we need to  express. '   Sombat, in fact, has been spearheading similar, albeit  smaller 'innovative political activity' for red shirt  supporters to rally around.  One weekend saw him lead this  protest movement on to the beaches near the resort town of  Pattaya, south of Bangkok, for a party.  Another Sunday had  him lead red shirts through the capital on bicycles.    The 42-year-old has continued these efforts at the risk  of getting arrested again.  In June, he was detained by the  police for two weeks for defying the emergency law after he  tied red ribbons near Rajaprasong in memory of the  protesters killed during the April and May crackdowns.    But the government appears to have eased its grip on  Sombat and his red shirt protests for now.  'The gathering on  Sunday in Rajaprasong is a sign of increasing normalcy,  although the situation is not totally normal,' Panitan  Wattanayagorn, a government spokesman, told IPS.  'The  demonstrators were within their constitutional rights to  protest. '   'The Prime Minister has acknowledged that there is a  strong show of political differences from certain groups in  society,' he added.  'They could show it and do so as long as  it is peaceful. ' 