Although U. S.  military spending will reach an all-time high  next year, the Pentagon budget almost certainly faces steady  cuts over the medium to long term, mainly as a result of  increasing pressure to reduce the ballooning national debt,  according to a growing consensus among defence experts. And while Pentagon chief Robert Gates is taking pre-emptive  action by promising to save 100 billion dollars over the  next five years by reducing bureaucratic duplication and  waste, including the number of flag officers, and reliance  on private contractors, and cancelling the 'bells and  whistles' on some big-ticket weapons systems, some analysts  believe bigger cuts are inevitable. In a recent and widely noted talk at a conference here  earlier this month entitled 'Doing More With Less', Todd  Harrison of the non-partisan think tank, the Center for  Strategic and Budgetary Assessments, predicted that the  military budget could decline by an average of three to four  percent a year beginning after the 2012 presidential  elections, if not next year. The Pentagon's budget could fall from the 739 billion  dollars that Congress is expected to approve for 2011 to the  equivalent of 450 billion dollars by as early as 2020,  according to Harrison, whose talk was covered in detail by  the influential 'Defense News' weekly.  With so much money at stake, defence contractors, some of  which have already announced plans to lay off thousands of  workers around the country, have been beefing up their  lobbying operations in Washington.  Boeing, for example, boosted its lobbying expenditures to  nine million dollars during the first half of 2010, two  million dollars more than it spent during the same period  last year, according to the Center for Responsive Politics.   Northrop Grumman matched that total, increasing its spending  by three million dollars. At some 693 billion dollars, the 2010 U. S.  defence budget  has more than doubled over the past decade, rising an  average of six percent a year over that period.  It currently  accounts for nearly half of all military spending worldwide,  according to the Stockholm International Peace Research  Institute (SIPRI). At the same time, however, the national debt has mushroomed  to some 13 trillion dollars, while the federal deficit —  estimated at around 1. 5 trillion dollars this year —  currently exceeds 10 percent of gross domestic product  (GDP), the highest level since the end of World War II.  Until now, the Pentagon has been exempt from growing public  pressure to cut the deficit; indeed, Congress is poised to  approve what amounts to a 2. 4 percent increase in military  spending in 2011. But that exemption may not last much longer, as even  Republicans, particularly those identified with the more- libertarian elements of the populist Tea Party movement,  have begun questioning whether the country can afford the  financial burden, especially at a time when Washington's  closest NATO allies are themselves making major cutbacks in  their defence budgets. 'Members of Congress from both parties are increasingly  eyeing the defense budget as a place to reduce spending and  bring down the federal deficit, a sign that such spending is  no longer sacrosanct, as it has been for nine years,'  according to John Donnelly, a veteran defence specialist at  Congressional Quarterly. Indeed, the bipartisan nature of the new attitude was  underlined in July when Texas Republican Rep.  Ron Paul, a  Tea Party favourite, co-authored a column entitled 'Why We  must Reduce Military Spending' on the widely read  HuffingtonPost website with liberal Democrat Rep.  Barney  Frank.  It called for cutting Pentagon spending by one  trillion dollars over the next 10 years, both by  'eliminating certain Cold War weapons and scaling back our  commitments overseas'. Top Pentagon officials, led by Gates - himself a long-time  Republican — have themselves acknowledged the need for cuts,  although not nearly at the level suggested by Paul and  Frank. In a major policy address last May, Gates declared that the  post-9/11 'gusher' in defence spending 'has been turned off,  and will stay off for a good period of time'. 'We can't have a strong military if we have a weak economy,'  Gates told reporters, a theme that the chairman of the Joint  Chiefs of Staff, Adm.  Mike Mullen, picked up last month when  he warned that 'the most significant threat to our national  security is the debt. 'It was in that context that Gates, who last year cancelled  several major weapons systems, laid out his five-year plan  to save 100 billion dollars.  At the same time, however, he  warned against major cuts, noting that his 'greatest fear is  that in economic tough times …people will see the defence  budget as a place to solve the nation's deficit problems. 'At the same time, however, Pentagon officials have insisted  that defence spending should continue to grow in real terms,  albeit at a significantly slower rate — at least one percent  a year - than during the past decade. 'Robert Gates's main mission is not to cut the Pentagon  budget, but to save it,' William Hartung, director of the  Arms and Security Initiative of the New America Foundation  (NAF), told IPS.  'His various changes are all being done in  the service of protecting his department from reduction in  its overall budget. ''He may succeed in the short term, but, as concerns about  federal deficit continue to grow, the Pentagon budget will  inevitably go down in real terms, as it should when it is at  its highest levels since World War II,' he added. 'The fiscal crisis is real; it poses serious, long-term  threats to America's well-being and global position; and the  only solution …is for all parts of federal spending and  revenues to be on the table, including defense,' wrote  Gordon Adams, a top national-security expert in President  Bill Clinton's budget office, in a colloquium on the  'National Journal's' website. The Obama administration and lawmakers are clearly hoping  that savings gained by the U. S.  drawdown in Iraq, to be  followed, beginning in July 2011, by a gradual withdrawal  from Afghanistan will go a long way toward reducing the  defence budget to more manageable levels.  The Pentagon is  spending 65 billion dollars on Iraq and around 100 dollars  on Afghanistan this year. But even in what most analysts consider the highly unlikely  event — especially given pressure on Obama by the military  brass to delay or slow his withdrawal plans in Afghanistan -  those costs can be reduced to near zero over the next five  years, the military budget will remain substantially higher  in real terms than it was after previous wars, including the  Korean and Vietnam conflicts. If, moreover, the economy fails to generate growth rates  sustained during the go-go 1990s — another highly unlikely  prospect given the depth of the recession from which it has  only just begun to recover - the pressure for additional  cuts is certain to intensify, no matter which party controls  Congress or the White House. How those cuts will be achieved is certain to have major  geo-strategic, as well as financial and fiscal, consequences  not just for the U. S. , but also for a host of countries,  particularly in Eurasia, that have long relied on its  military dominance. There has been 'the assumption that the United States is  still the world's hegemon, duty-bound to be prepared to  fight everyone, everywhere if imperial interests require  it,' wrote ret.  Col.  Patrick Lang, a former top Defense  Intelligence Agency official, in the National Journal's  colloquium.  'How can responsible, grown-up people who  understand our economic position think that has anything to  do with reality?'*Jim Lobe's blog on U. S.  foreign policy can be read at  http://www. lobelog. com. 