The U. N.  children's agency UNICEF is taking the lead in an  intense global campaign to provide schooling to some 69  million children who are unable to go to school - or don't  have any schools to go to. 'Ending the cycle of poverty for children, their families  and their communities begins with education,' said UNICEF's  recently-installed executive director, Anthony Lake. A new report, titled 'Back to School?' by the Global  Campaign for Education, says that two of the worst places to  be a school child in 2010 are Somalia, long described as a  failed state, and earthquake-devastated Haiti. The countries with the most fragile educational systems are  mostly in Africa.  But the continent is making progress under  trying circumstances, says UNICEF. The oil-rich West African state of Nigeria, described as  home to the largest number of children out of school (8. 6  million), is expected to still have some 8. 3 million out of  school by 2015. In sub-Saharan Africa alone, some 38 million children drop  out of school every year due mostly to economic reasons. Still, says UNICEF, there is 'commendable progress' in  achieving basic quality education for children. In Tanzania, less than half of all primary school-aged  children were in school at the beginning of the decade.  But  today, nearly all children attend primary school. India, which recorded about 5. 6 million children out of  school in 2008, is expected to bring down this number to  750,000 by 2015. Kenya and Yemen, with about 1. 0 million children out of  school in 2008, are set to almost halve this number by 2015. Jasmine Whitbread, chief executive officer of Save the  Children, points out that overall, 'Progress has been made  in achieving universal primary education. ''However, donors and states must now focus on education of  children living in conflict-affected and fragile states.   This is a huge proportion of the 69 million and it's not  improving,' she added. And that's a huge waste of potential that cannot be allowed  to continue, Whitbread warned. 'If current trends continue,' Maida Pasic, a UNICEF  educational specialist, told IPS, 'as many as 56 million  children will not be in school in 2015': the deadline for  the U. N. 's Millennium Development Goals, which includes  universal primary education. At a high-level roundtable luncheon sponsored by UNICEF last  week, Sheikha Mozah Bint Nasser Al-Missned, chair of the  Qatar Foundation for Education, Science and Community  Development, said what children need are chances. 'And what we need is to take a bold stand - and to ask  ourselves hard questions,' she said. 'Are we ready to protect educators in Iraq who are being  kidnapped and assassinated? Are we ready to ensure  educational supplies are not blocked from students in Gaza?  And are we ready to ensure that every child in Afghanistan -  girls and boys - going to school are not turned away?' she  asked. 'There can be no peace and prosperity without education,'  she warned. She also pointed out that last July, the General Assembly  passed a resolution titled 'the Right to Education in  Emergency Situations. 'As a result, and for the first time, governments of the  world  explicitly committed themselves to physically protect  educators  and educational facilities ('the indicators of  our civilization as I see them') at all levels, in times of  conflict and disaster.  Al-Missned said the international community must exercise  authority under humanitarian and human rights laws to  protect educational facilities and educators. Former British Prime Minister Gordon Brown, currently on the  High Level Panel for the Global Campaign for Education, has  warned that if education budgets are not protected from the  ravages of the financial crisis, all the progress made so  far could be jeopardised and generations will be condemned  to poverty. Across sub-Saharan Africa, according to UNICEF, government  spending on primary education fell from 49 percent to 44  percent.  An estimated 16. 0 billion in aid annually is needed to reach  the 'Education for All' goals in poor countries.  In 2008,  poor countries received only 2. 0 billion in aid for basic  education. And globally, an additional 10. 3 million teachers are needed  to meet universal primary education targets by 2015, says  UNICEF. Meanwhile, a joint UNICEF-World Bank School Fees Abolition  Initiative (SFAI) is making significant progress in some of  the world's poorest nations. The scheme enables pioneer countries like Ethiopia, Malawi,  Tanzania and Kenya, which had taken steps to eliminate fees  and other costs, to share their experiences and best  practices with countries considering a similar move. The SFAI provides practical and financial support to these  countries and targeted fee exemptions, subsidies and  incentives for the poor, knowing that household costs of  schooling are a major barrier preventing children from  accessing basic education. To date, over 20 predominantly sub-Saharan African  countries, but also others like Haiti and Bangladesh, have  their fee abolition efforts monitored and coordinated by  SFAI. Kenya's Free Primary Education (FPE) programme turned out to  be one of the success stories in Africa. In 2003, the Kenyan government scrapped school fees as well  as levies that parents used to pay.  The impact of the move  was instantaneous.  The number of pupils in public primary  schools increased from 5. 9 million in December 2002 to 7. 1  million two years later.  After having been absorbed into the  SFAI framework, Kenya began to train school management  personnel and encourage community involvement, significantly  lowering drop-out rates. *Additional reporting by Jennifer Leong. 