The steady increase in U. S.  cross-border attacks from  Afghanistan into the frontier areas of Pakistan — whether by  drone missiles or attack helicopters — is causing a serious  backlash from both the region's residents and Islamabad's  government and military leadership. In the latest case, the government of President Asif Ali  Zardari Thursday closed NATO's primary supply route into  land-locked Afghanistan after helicopters from the U. S. -led  International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) attacked a  military checkpoint in Kurram Agency inside Pakistan,  reportedly killing three Pakistani soldiers and injuring  three others. While ISAF officials apologised for the casualties and  insisted that the attack was carried out in 'self-defence',  the government's closure of the supply route — even if  temporary — through the Khyber Pass marked an unusually  strong reaction on Islamabad's part. 'We will have to see whether we are allies or enemies,'  remarked Interior Minister Rehman Malik immediately after  the attack, the third of four reported cross-border raids by  ISAF forces allegedly engaged in 'hot pursuit' of Afghan  insurgents over the past several days.  At the same time, a suspected drone attack carried out in  neighbouring North Waziristan Agency reportedly killed at  least five suspected Taliban militants tied to the so-called  Haqqani network, the Afghan Taliban faction most closely  associated with al Qaeda's senior leadership which it is  believed to shelter. The attack near Miranshah was the latest in more than 120  drone strikes in Pakistan authorised under the  administration of President Barack Obama since he took  office 20 months ago - a sharp and apparently still- accelerating increase in such strikes and more than double  the number authorised under George W.  Bush, according to the  New America Foundation (NAF), a Washington-based think tank.  Indeed, the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) carried out  more attacks in Pakistan's Federally Administered Tribal  Areas (FATA) in September than in any month since the spy  agency first launched the cross-border programme six years  ago, according to a tally maintained by NAF, which also  released the results of an unprecedented survey conducted in  FATA that concluded that the drone campaign may be  counterproductive. Based on face-to-face interviews in June and July with 1,000  adults across all seven of FATA's tribal agencies, the  survey found that nearly nine out of 10 respondents strongly  oppose U. S.  military operations in the region and that  nearly six in 10 believe that suicide attacks against U. S.   military forces are justified.  Indeed, the United Nations  has found many suicide attackers in Afghanistan came from  the FATA region. 'Our poll finding that shows these suicide fighters enjoy  widespread popular support inside FATA explains in large  measure the success of their sanctuary inside the tribal  areas — a safe haven that has had devastating consequences  for American soldiers inside Afghanistan,' according to a  summary article by NAF's Peter Bergen and Patrick Doherty,  and Ken Ballen of Terror Free Tomorrow, a polling group that  conducted the survey, and published by CNN. com. The news from the survey was not all bad for Washington.   More than three of four respondents said they opposed the  presence in their region of al Qaeda, and more than two- thirds said they opposed the Pakistani Taliban.  And the poll, which was conducted before the disastrous  flooding that displaced hundreds of thousands of FATA  residents, showed strong support for the Pakistani military  and its efforts to pursue al Qaeda and subdue the Pakistani  Taliban.  Nearly 80 percent of respondents said FATA should be  governed by the army, which over the past two years has  conducted counterinsurgency campaigns against the Taliban in  all of the agencies except North Waziristan.  And, in  contrast to the support for suicide bombings against U. S.   military targets, only one in 10 respondents said they  approved of such acts against the Pakistani military. The intensification of cross-border U. S.  military action,  particularly the last month's spike in attacks, has stoked  much speculation over the reasons why. Media reports over the last several days have claimed that  Washington is trying to disrupt an al Qaeda plan allegedly  hatched  in FATA to carry out a series of attacks in  November in major West European cities similar to those  carried out by a group of terrorists associated with  Pakistan's Lashkar-e-Taiba (LeT) against high-profile  targets in Mumbai, India, in November 2008.  Nearly 200  people were killed by gunfire and bombings in the  coordinated assault.  Some European governments have taken steps in recent days  indicating they believe the threat of terrorist attacks has  indeed become more serious. CIA chief Leon Panetta was in Islamabad Thursday to brief  his counterpart in the Pakistani military's Inter Services  Intelligence (ISI) agency, Lt.  Gen.  Ahmed Shuja Pasha, on  the alleged plot, which purportedly involves both the LeT  and the Haqqani network, according to a 'high-level source'  cited by Josh Rogin, a prominent blogger at the  foreignpolicy. com website. Panetta was also pressing his interlocutors to permit ISAF  to expand and intensify its missions, including CIA drone  strikes, against al Qaeda, the Haqqani network, and their  associates, inside Pakistan, according to Rogin's source.  On the eve of Panetta's visit, U. S.  attack helicopters  carried out what ISAF called a 'hot pursuit' attack against  suspected Haqqani militants as they retreated across the  border from Khost into North Waziristan, reportedly killing  more than 50 of them.  The Obama administration has been deeply frustrated by the  Pakistani military's refusal to launch an offensive in North  Waziristan, which, in addition to serving as a safe haven  for the Haqqani network and al Qaeda, is also used as a key  base for the Taliban's infiltration into Afghanistan.  Indeed, most experts here believe that some ISI units, if  not the spy agency itself, continue to provide covert  support to the Haqqani network and other Afghan Taliban  factions in order to maximise Islamabad's influence in  Afghanistan's future.  With little, if any, apparent progress being made by the  'surge' of nearly 40,000 more U. S.  and NATO forces into  southern and eastern Afghanistan in the past six months, the  U. S.  commander there, Gen.  David Petraeus, is particularly  eager to, in the words of a 'senior administration official'  quoted by Tuesday's New York Times, 'turn up the heat on the  safe havens'. The same Times article reported that the U. S.  Special  Operations Command (SOC) has recently been updating plans  for cross-border raids by U. S.  troops. If the new survey is any indication of popular sentiment,  such an escalation is almost certain to provoke a greater  backlash from local residents.  It would also be far more  likely to draw strong protests from the Pakistani army and  government, which have quietly gone along with drone strikes  but appear to regard other forms of cross-border attacks as  much more serious violations of Pakistan's national  sovereignty. Washington's frustration with the ISI and the Pakistani  military is likely to be compounded both by reports of  growing tensions between the military's leadership and the  Zardari government, particularly over latter's alleged  incompetence in dealing with the floods, and by growing  evidence that the army, which currently receives about two  million dollars a year in U. S.  aid, has summarily executed  scores — if not hundreds - of suspected Pakistani Taliban  militants in its counterinsurgency offensives. *Jim Lobe's blog on U. S.  foreign policy can be read at  http://www. lobelog. com. 