Following serious setbacks to the U. S.  military's war plan in  Afghanistan, the Barack Obama administration has taken the  first tentative step toward a negotiated settlement of the  conflict by actively seeking to ascertain the willingness of  the Taliban to enter into negotiations, according to a source  familiar with the administration's thinking about the issue. But the administration is still sticking to demands on the  Taliban that it knows are not realistic, in a manner that is  strikingly similar to the demands stated publicly by the  United States in the early stage of the Vietnam War. Obama has yet to make a crucial political decision to  separate a military settlement with the Taliban from the  negotiation of a settlement between the Taliban and the  Hamid Karzai government, according to the source. The source confirmed to IPS that the Pakistani military has  been in discussions with Taliban leaders and had been  sharing its notes of the meetings with U. S.  and Saudi  officials, as had been reported by Syed Saleem Shahzad in  the Asia Times Sep.  11.  But the source suggested that, contrary to the implication  of the Shahzad story, the Pakistani conversations with the  Taliban are not aimed at preparing the way for a separate  U. S. -Taliban deal.  The administration is still in the stage  of intensive intelligence gathering, according to the  source, rather than conducting an indirect political  dialogue with the Taliban leadership separate from contacts  between Karzai and the Taliban. The administration position on peace talks was articulated  by Gen.  Petraeus in an interview with Katie Couric Aug.  20.   'We're not the ones calling the shots,' said Petraeus.  'At  the end of the day those who will determine whether  reconciliation goes forward or not are those who lead the  Afghan government, and that is why it is appropriate that  they lead these efforts…. 'Petraeus listed Karzai's conditions for the Taliban to meet  for a peace settlement: 'They must respect the constitution,  lay down weapons, cut off ties with al Qaeda and essentially  be willing to be productive members of society. 'The source indicated that the Obama administration has not  suggested any willingness to agree to a U. S.  troop  withdrawal in return for a Taliban commitment to reject al  Qaeda and to ensure that it will not be able to operate from  Afghan soil.  Such a troop withdrawal-for-al Qaeda deal could  satisfy the U. S.  national security interest in the war as  articulated by the Obama administration itself.  Contrary to the Shahzad article, the Pakistanis have not  conveyed anything to the Taliban as concrete as asking  whether the Taliban would agree to a deal under which U. S.   troops would evacuate from the south but remain in the  north.  The U. S.  continues to assert that full U. S.  troop withdrawal  would only come in conjunction with a settlement between  Karzai and the Taliban.  The administration is fully aware that the final settlement  in Afghanistan will bear no resemblance to the demand for  Taliban submission that is the official U. S. -Karzai position  at present, according to the source.  That demand is roughly equivalent to the position taken by  the Lyndon Johnson administration in 1965 that the  insurgents in South Vietnam could participate in elections  if they would 'lay down their arms' and 'accept amnesty'. The source explained the rationale for maintaining that  unrealistic maximalist position as being the belief that it  will result in a better deal than going to the U. S.  'bottom  line' immediately.  Underlying that posture is the assumption that the U. S.   military presence in Afghanistan gives the United States  significant leverage on the Taliban with regard to the  internal settlement with Karzai. Even if the United States were to withdraw two-thirds of its  troops, the source indicated, it would still have such  diplomatic leverage, partly because it would increase  domestic support for the war, in the same way that President  Richard Nixon's withdrawal of troops from Vietnam from 1969  through 1972 made it possible for him to lengthen the war. In the Pakistani-Taliban talks on a settlement, the Taliban  leaders have insisted on a complete U. S.  troop withdrawal,  according to Shahzad. The Taliban has also confirmed what had been signaled in an  article on the Islamic Emirate of Afghanistan website last  December - that it is prepared to give legal assurances that  al Qaeda and other global jihadist organisations would not  be allowed to operate in Afghanistan after the war against  foreign military forces.  In an interview with IPS last January, Arsalaan Rahmani, a  former deputy minister of education in the Taliban regime  who participated in a small team that had served as  intermediaries between Karzai and the Taliban, said any  negotiations between the Taliban and Karzai regime would  have to be preceded by agreement with the United States on  the key international issues of withdrawal of all foreign  troops and the Taliban's renunciation of ties with al Qaeda. A comment by Gen.  David Petraeus on Monday that high-level  Taliban figures had 'reached out' to Karzai appeared to  suggest that the Taliban might be relaxing that position.   But Rachmani told IPS he doubted Petraeus's claim of a new  Taliban approach to Karzai.  He said he would be aware of any  such change in the Taliban posture.  Former Taliban foreign ministry official Wahid Muzhda, who  follows Taliban policies closely, also told IPS he had not  heard of any such move by the Taliban.  Muzhda noted that  during Eid, the three-day Muslim holiday marking the end of  Ramadan Sep.  9, Taliban spiritual leader Mullah Omar had  vowed to continue the war and said the Taliban would 'never  accept' the current government.  The fact that the administration's thinking about a  negotiated settlement has not advanced beyond the stage of  maximalist demands suggests that its policy will have to  through a series of stages before adjusting fully to the  reality that it cannot control the post-occupation politics  of Afghanistan. *Gareth Porter is an investigative historian and journalist  specialising in U. S.  national security policy.  The paperback  edition of his latest book, 'Perils of Dominance: Imbalance  of Power and the Road to War in Vietnam', was published in  2006. 