On the ninth anniversary of the U. S.  military intervention in their country, a new  report released here Thursday finds that Afghans remain deeply distrustful and  resentful of the impact and intent of foreign forces there. Based on dozens of interviews and focus group sessions in seven provinces in  western, eastern, and southern Afghanistan over the past year, the report by  the Open Society Foundations (OSF) found that Afghans tend to blame U. S. - led forces as much or more than the Taliban for the country’s continuing  violence and instability. 'This reflects a growing divide between the perceptions of the Western public  and policymakers and those of Afghan citizens about the intentions and  accomplishments of international forces in Afghanistan,' according to the 25- page report, titled ‘The Trust Deficit: The Impact of Local Perception on Policy  in Afghanistan. ’Moreover, policy changes adopted over the past year by U. S.  and other foreign  forces aimed at reducing civilian casualties and protecting the civilian  population have not succeeded in reducing local perceptions of Western  indifference or even malevolence. 'Overcoming Afghan resentment toward international forces and the Afghan  government has been a key concern in the new counterinsurgency strategy,  and recent policies have reduced civilian casualties, improved detention  conditions, and increased strategic communications in an attempt to win  Afghan ‘hearts and minds’,' the report said. Indeed, a U. N.  report issued in August found the Taliban and its allies  responsible for 76 percent of the more than 3,000 civilian casualties  registered in the first six months of this year, while U. S. -led forces were  responsible for only 12 percent - down from 30 percent during the same  period in 2009. But '…these policy reforms have often been too little, too late,' the report  said, noting that the 'build up of mistrust and grievances from the past nine  years' will make any western-backed short- or long-term policy initiatives in  Afghanistan, including possible efforts at reconciliation and re-integration of  Taliban forces, much more difficult. The report comes amid growing public pessimism here about the outcome of  what has become Washington’s longest foreign war in its history. That pessimism has been fed by a steady flow of reports regarding high-level  corruption on the part of the government of President Hamid Karzai and his  family; ballot-stuffing and other abuses in last month’s parliamentary  elections; and, more recently, a sharp deterioration in relations between  Washington and the Pakistani military - particularly its intelligence arm, the  Inter-Services Intelligence (ISI) agency which the U. S.  believes is not only  providing the Taliban a safe haven, but is aiding and abetting the insurgent  group, as well. Tensions between Pakistan and the U. S.  spiked last week after U. S.   helicopters, purportedly engaged in 'hot pursuit' of Taliban forces, briefly  crossed the border and hit a checkpoint on Pakistan’s side of the border,  killing three soldiers. Islamabad immediately shut down one of two major supply routes through its  territory for international forces based in land-locked Afghanistan and,  despite a series of official apologies by the U. S.  and NATO, has yet to re-open  it. Without Pakistan’s full co-operation in denying the Taliban and its affiliates  safe haven - let alone intelligence and material support - most experts here  believe Washington and its NATO allies will find it nearly impossible to  definitively turn the tide in the war in Afghanistan in their favour, particularly  by July 2011, the date when President Barack Obama has pledged to begin  drawing down the 100,000 U. S.  troops who are currently deployed there. The new study also comes as the U. S.  military is mounting a major counter- insurgency drive aimed at weakening and eventually evicting the Taliban from  its traditional stronghold in and around Kandahar, which is also the heartland  of Afghanistan’s Pashtun population. The offensive is aimed at capturing or killing mid- and senior-level Taliban  militants in the area, while enhancing the security of the local civilian  population - a model that U. S.  forces used with inconclusive results in the  farming region of Marjah in neighbouring Helmand Province over much of the  past year. But the new report raises serious questions about whether that approach can  work, given the deep-seated distrust that has built up about western forces  not just in Kandahar, but in non-Pashtun areas of the country, as well. 'In the course of this research, the [OSF] found few meaningful differences in  perceptions of international forces, regardless of the ethnicity of the Afghans  interviewed, their level of education, political affiliation, or proximity to  conflict,' the study, which was carried out with the collaboration of local  Afghan civil-society organisations, concluded. While Western policy-makers believe their forces are in Afghanistan to  improve the situation, the report said, Afghans, have an entirely different  impression, based in important part on their experience of the last nine years. 'Incidents of civilian casualties, night raids, wrongful or abusive detentions,  deteriorating security, and the perceived impunity of international forces have  generated negative stereotypes of international forces as violent, abusive, and  sometimes, deliberately malevolent in their conduct and nature,' it found.   'Many [of the interviewees] were even suspicious that international forces  were directly or indirectly supporting insurgents,' it went on. 'These suspicions, in turn, have fed into broader shifts toward framing  international forces as occupiers, rather than as a benefit to Afghanistan.   Today, each incident of abuse, whether caused by international forces or  insurgents, reinforces these negative perceptions and further undermines any  remaining Afghan trust. ''Though stories about international forces supporting insurgents or planting  IEDs are often dismissed as conspiracy theories or propaganda, they offer a  reality check on just how strained the international community’s position is in  Afghanistan,' said Erica Gaston, the report’s co-author, whose previous work  in Afghanistan helped persuade U. S.  commanders to tighten their rules of  engagement. Her views were echoed by Michael Semple, an expert at the Center for Human  Rights at Harvard’s Kennedy School of Government, who has spent much of  the past decade in rural Afghanistan.  'This is extremely resonant,' he said of  the report’s conclusions.  'This is the discourse you pick up when you go out  and talk to people in the countryside. 'In some cases, he said, elite sectors, including Karzai himself, contribute to  these perceptions.  'Karzai personally doesn’t like the idea of waging war  against a section of his people.  He’s very comfortable with the idea that  NATO is fighting the war. 'In order to rebuild trust, the report called for a series of measures, including  extending the policy reforms to minimise civilian casualties; reversing the  increased use of night raids as the main tactic for capturing or killing  suspected Taliban fighters; exercising tighter control and accountability over  Special Operations and non-military forces involved in night raids; and  ensuring greater transparency and responsiveness to allegations of abuses  against Afghans. The report also urged international forces to exercise greater caution in  undertaking new initiatives to arm, train, or equip local militias and to  reconsider the new U. S.  strategy of pushing foreign troops closer to local  inhabitants before they can be 'meaningfully protected' from insurgent  violence or collateral damage. Afghans often blame the presence of international forces for provoking  Taliban attacks in which the local population is caught in the middle,  according to the report. *Jim Lobe's blog on U. S.  foreign policy can be read at  http://www. lobelog. com.  