By continuing its halt in NATO convoys headed for Afghanistan  through the Torkham border crossing into a second week,  Pakistan's military leadership has brought an end to the  unilateral attacks in Pakistan pushed by Gen.  David Petraeus  and forced Washington to make a new accommodation. And it may make it impossible for Petraeus to make the  argument in the future that the United States can succeed in  Afghanistan, given the refusal of Pakistan to budge on the  issue.  The halt in NATO convoys bound for Afghanistan and  unhindered attacks on tanker trucks have continued despite a  decision by the White House to direct U. S.  Ambassador to  Pakistan Anne Patterson and the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs  of Staff Adm.  Mike Mullen to apologise to the Pakistani  government for the deaths of three Pakistani soldiers  resulting from a U. S.  helicopter raid from Afghanistan into  Pakistan.  Pres.  Barack Obama has clearly abandoned the tough line  toward Pakistan represented by cross-border helicopter  attacks and accelerated drone strikes in an effort to reduce  tensions.  U. S.  and Pakistani officials have been engaged at various  levels to find a way out of the impasse, according to one  administration official.  The official said some of the  tensions should dissipate in the coming days, suggesting  that the U. S.  is eager to avoid further troubles on the  border.  The Pakistani government clearly sees the border closure and  the attacks on tanker trucks as giving it powerful leverage  on Washington to stop all cross-border attacks and to  strictly limit the number of drone attacks and the areas in  which they take place.  In his press briefing Thursday, foreign office spokesperson  Abdul Basit attacked the drone strikes policy as a violation  of Pakistani sovereignty and said it 'does not serve the  larger strategic interests, especially in the context of our  efforts to win hearts and minds…. 'Pakistan's leverage stems from the fact that 70 to 80  percent of the U. S. -NATO logistical supplies for the war in  Afghanistan go through Pakistan.  As much 80 percent of the  supplies that enter Afghanistan from Pakistan go through the  Torkham crossing.  A second logistics route through Chaman is  still open. Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty reported Friday that 6,500  NATO vehicles are backed up along the entire 1,500 km route  from the port of Karachi to the Khyber Pass.  Despite the claim by the spokesperson for the U. S. -NATO  command in Afghanistan, Gen.  Joseph Blotz, that the closing  of the border crossing poses 'no danger to ongoing future  ISAF operations', replacing the Pakistani routes with  alternative routes through Central Asia would prohibitively  time-consuming and expensive.  The crisis in U. S. -Pakistani relations was the result of a  decision by the Obama administration — which press reports  suggest was on the basis of a strong recommendation from  Petraeus — to act much more aggressively and unilaterally if  the Pakistani military did not do more to attack militant  groups in North Waziristan, especially the Haqqani group,  which dominates the successful insurgency in eastern  Afghanistan.  Unnamed U. S.  officials were reported in the Wall Street  Journal Oct.  2-3 as saying that there was less concern about  upsetting the Pakistanis than there had been only a few  months earlier.  Two days later, the Journal reported,  without attribution, that Petraeus had determined that the  safe havens in Pakistan were a greater threat than he had  previously thought.  The Petraeus decision to push for a unilateral escalation of  force thus provides an additional element for the narrative  that he will have to construct to protect his personal  interest in avoiding responsibility for military failure in  Afghanistan. One element of the decision was to increase drone strikes in  Waziristan dramatically to an unprecedented 22 in September  - more than four times the average number in the previous  six months.  In the past, the United States had gotten  permission from the Pakistani government for specific  geographic 'boxes' in which drone strikes could be carried  out, as revealed in 'Obama's War' by Bob Woodward.  Evidently that was not done, however, before the sudden  dramatic increase in drone strikes in September. The second element was to carry out at a series of cross- border helicopter gunship attacks in Pakistan that were not  cleared in advance with the Pakistani military.  During the  cross-border strike Sep.  30, moreover, three Pakistani army  troops were killed by U. S.  helicopter fire. Petraeus and his allies in the Pentagon apparently  underestimated the determination with which the Pakistani  military would react.  When the closure was first announced,  some U. S.  officials said they expected the bordered to  reopen within 72 hours — that is, by Oct.  5 -- according to  the Washington Post. Instead, the spokesperson for the Pakistani foreign  ministry, Abdul Basit, warned that the closure of the  Torkham gate would continue until popular anger over the  U. S.  attacks inside Pakistan had subsided.  Basit also  virtually invited attacks on the NATO convoys by suggesting  that they would be regarded as 'the reaction of the  Pakistani masses'.  Since then there have been at least six attacks in which  tankers have been torched over the past week. The Pakistani response should have been no surprise to U. S.   officials.  In 'Obama's War', Bob Woodward, who had  unprecedented access to top officials, said U. S.   intelligence 'indicated the Pakistanis believed the U. S.   would not jeopardize their relationship', because of its  dependence on the country's agreement to allow convoys to  use Pakistani logistics routes into Afghanistan.  The intelligence analysis pointed out that the Pakistanis  would not even have to close the border itself, but would  gain sufficient leverage simply by allowing some militants  to close key bridges or overpasses.  The Pakistani military leaders had threatened to close down  the supply routes in September 2008, in response to a single  cross-border raid ordered by the George W.  Bush  administration. The Pakistani closure of NATO's main logistics route may  influence the domestic politics of the Obama  administration's policy toward the war.  As Woodward's book  reveals, U. S.  officials have long agreed privately that the  war effort in Afghanistan cannot succeed without a change in  Pakistani policy toward the safe havens for the Taliban. If the result of the crisis in U. S. -Pakistani relations is a  retreat by the United States, it would signal a clear end to  the hope that Pakistan would change its policy on  Afghanistan.  That, in turn would strengthen Obama's hand in  maneuvering with Petraeus over beginning a drawdown of  troops in July 2011.  *Gareth Porter is an investigative historian and journalist  specialising in U. S.  national security policy.  The paperback  edition of his latest book, 'Perils of Dominance: Imbalance  of Power and the Road to War in Vietnam', was published in  2006. 