Failures in vetting, training and supervising Defence  Department private security contractors are putting U. S.  and  coalition troops as well as Afghan civilians at risk and  unwittingly aiding Afghan militants by hiring security  contractors provided by the Taliban and by warlords, warns a  new report released last week by the powerful Senate Armed  Services Committee. The report - 'Inquiry into the Role and Oversight of Private  Security Contractors in Afghanistan' - resulted from an in- depth year-long process.  The committee said the report  'provides a detailed critical assessment of the role of  private security contractors in Afghanistan' and 'reveals  the threat that security contractors operating without  adequate U. S.  government supervision can pose to the mission  in Afghanistan. 'The report charges that there are significant gaps in U. S.   government oversight of private security contractors in  Afghanistan.  The Defence Department 'has failed to enforce  its policies meant to hold private security contractors'  accountable and to address serious private security  contractor deficiencies,' the report charged. The United States increasingly relies on private contractors  in Iraq and Afghanistan to perform a range of services, from  filing paperwork to using deadly force.  Private military  contractors still outnumber U. S.  troops there.  As of May  2010, there were over 23,000 armed private security  contractors in Afghanistan, and as the committee's inquiry  found, operating with inadequate government oversight. The mission of Afghan subcontractors usually includes  guarding U. S.  military bases, civilian installations,  construction projects and truck convoys of supplies. The response from good government and human rights groups  was largely positive.  POGO, the Project on Government Oversight, called for  stronger contract oversight and 'a serious reevaluation of  whether security should be outsourced in war zones'. Nick Schwellenbach, POGO's director of investigations, told  IPS, 'The new findings further make the case for stronger  oversight of contractors - but they also lead us to ask if  security functions should be outsourced at all. ''More money means more problems if there isn't sufficient  oversight of security contractors.  The most important  question to ask, though, is if we should be using  contractors at all where there is no rule of law,' said  Danielle Brian, POGO's executive director.  'Several  government reports say we're funding people who are  undermining our efforts in Afghanistan. 'Laura W.  Murphy, director of the American Civil Liberties  Union Washington Legislative Office, said, 'The massive use  of private contractors in our intelligence community further  exacerbates the lack of control, oversight and  accountability that already plagues our intelligence  apparatus. 'She added, 'The excessive use of contractors puts more  distance between the government and those carrying out  intelligence work and infuses the profit motive into a  calculation that should be focused on effectiveness and  adhering to the rule of law. 'Another influential group, Human Rights First (HRF),  referenced its own recent report on contractor oversight,  which concluded that inadequate oversight of private  contractors in conflict zones and a failure to hold the  contractors legally accountable threatens to compromise U. S.   national security and undermine the nation's ongoing  military efforts in Iraq and Afghanistan.  HRF urged Congress to enact the Civilian Extraterritorial  Jurisdiction Act (CEJA) of 2010 to expand criminal  jurisdiction over and increase investigative resources for  serious crimes committed by U. S.  contractors. Sen.  Carl Levin, a Michigan Democrat, chair of the Armed  Services Committee, said the poor vetting of the 26,000  security contractors jeopardised the U. S.  military effort in  Afghanistan. 'We need to shut off the spigot of U. S.  dollars flowing into  the pockets of warlords and power brokers who act contrary  to our interests and contribute to the corruption that  weakens the support of the Afghan people for their  government,' Levin said in a statement. Investigators for the Senate Armed Services Committee found  'systemic failures' in the way 125 Defense Department  contracts were granted between 2007 and 2009. For example, those responsible for conducting background  checks on potential hires as security guards were  insufficient to discover possible associates of Afghan  warlords in a timely fashion.  Some security guards were  thought to be agents trained by Iran. The Senate investigation prompted Afghanistan's Interior  Minister to announce this week that his government would  shut down any private security firms that are unlicensed and  do not properly check the backgrounds of employees. The Senate report was based on 30 interviews with Defence  Department contractors and military personnel and written  responses from others. The report said that investigators found 'squandered  resources and dangerous failures in contractor performance,  including untrained guards, insufficient and unserviceable  weapons, unmanned posts and other shortcomings that directly  affect the safety of U. S.  military personnel. 'Nevertheless, the report concludes that 90 percent of the  security personnel work under U. S.  government contracts. 'Money is ammunition; don't put it in the wrong hands,' Gen.   David Petraeus warned in an August memo that gave  counterinsurgency guidance.  The Senate report said its 'inquiry uncovered evidence of  private  security contractors funneling U. S.  taxpayer  dollars to Afghan warlords and strongmen linked to murder,  kidnapping, bribery as well as Taliban and other anti- Coalition activities. ' The numerous problems covered in the report range from  untrained guards to insufficient weaponry to unmanned posts. The report confirmed suspicions that were raised in  congressional testimony last December, when Defence  Secretary Robert M.  Gates and Secretary of State Hillary  Clinton said they had suspicions the U. S.  government was  indirectly funding Afghan warlords and the Taliban. However, U. S.  military personnel have said the warlords  sometimes force out anyone else from the security jobs with  threats of violence. The U. S.  military hires contractors for the security jobs to  free up its own soldiers for duties more directly related to  combat.  Now, military leaders say they are reconsidering the  policy. It was recently revealed that the company formerly known as  Blackwater Worldwide — which has been banned from  contracting in Iraq — created a new subsidiary whose name is  not related to Blackwater, or Xe Services, as it is now  known, and used that subsidiary in its successful bid for  security work in Afghanistan.  The parent company has also  won additional security work in Iraq. Contracting officers said they had no knowledge of any  relationship between Xe Services and the new Afghan company,  but other government officials suggested that the name- change was merely a way to conceal the company's true  identity. 