With just under three months before southern Sudan votes on  whether to become an independent country, the U. S.  is stepping  up efforts to ensure the vote and post-vote resolution are  peaceful and credible — and NGOs are stepping up pressure to  ensure that Washington follows through. The U. S.  is the largest aid donor to Sudan, but up until  several weeks ago internal debates in Washington about how  best to deal with Khartoum threatened to weaken the U. S. 's  role as a peacekeeper there. Since then, Washington has placed Sudan squarely on its  diplomatic radar, as evidenced by President Barack Obama's  presence at a U. N.  meeting on Sudan in New York Sep.  24.  The  goal? Avert a return to the civil war that ravaged Africa's  largest country until it was ended by the Comprehensive  Peace Agreement in 2005. Five years later, Washington seems to have only just woken  up to the fact that the referendum on secession promised in  that 2005 accord is a short three months away, with both  voting preparations and diplomatic negotiations behind  schedule. 'The ball got dropped the day the peace agreement was signed  between the north and south,' said John Prendergast, co- founder of the Enough Project, in Washington Tuesday.  'As we  do so often, once the biggest mountain is surmounted we go  on to the next thing. 'Prendergast and other activists, such as the actor George  Clooney, who has travelled to Sudan multiple times and  produced a documentary on the Darfur conflict there, say  that the U. S.  has an opportunity, through effective  diplomacy with Khartoum and southern Sudan, to avoid the  massive post-referendum bloodshed that they say seems almost  inevitable right now. Clooney met this week with Obama and U. S.  policymakers,  telling them, 'We can pick this up in five or six months  when thousands of people have been killed or deal with it  now. ''On Jan.  9 [the South] is going to vote for their  independence and they're willing to die for it…we shouldn't  underestimate that,' he told a room of journalists and  foreign policy experts following his day of meetings  Tuesday.  'We're there.  We spend almost a billion dollars a  year there anyway.  So, you know, this is something that  requires no money and no American lives right now.  We can do  it now or we can mop it up. 'Washington seems to be listening to his and other activists'  pleas for more action from the U. S.  in ensuring Sudan is  prepared for the vote and its aftermath.  Obama recently  appointed a new special envoy to lead a U. S.  negotiation  teams in Sudan and his appearance at the U. N.  meeting was  praised by NGOs for helping to raise the international  profile of the issue. In terms of actions that can be taken to help the referendum  go off as smoothly as possible, Prendergast recommends a  carrot-and-stick approach in dealing with Sudan's president  — and indicted international war criminal — Omar al-BashirHe says that, on the one hand, the U. S.  and other  international actors can try to compromise with Bashir to  ensure he does not attack the south after it, almost  assuredly, votes for its independence. 'Human rights activists, including us, are going to be  sickened, but peace is more important,' Prendergast says. The 'stick' option might include freezing some of Bashir's  and other Khartoum figures' assets.  'We've got to be willing  to go after assets in a very significant way.  A lot of money  has been made by this oil,' Prendergast said. For now, though, the focus is on making sure powerful  countries like the U. S.  do what they can diplomatically to  avoid post-referendum bloodshed between the oil-rich,  Christian south and the Muslim north. 'There is a moment now in Sudan that is a decisive moment  that could potentially, with the proper diplomatic  intervention, prevent the loss of millions of lives,' said  Prendergast. 'We were late to Darfur.  We were late to Rwanda.  We have an  opportunity to be ahead of this,' said Clooney. The last few weeks have seen a flurry of international  activity in raising awareness of the possibility for a  delayed referendum vote and post-referendum violence.  The  U. N.  Security Council travelled to Sudan last week to assess  the progress of preparations for the January vote and urge  that it be held peacefully and on time.  And a group of Sudan  religious leaders is coming to Washington next week to  maintain the awareness other activists have generated of the  issue. The U. N.  envoys said Thursday in New York that the voting  could still take place on time despite preparations being  far behind schedule. But they also warned of southerners fears of regarding the  potential for post-vote war.  The north is not expected to  let the south — and its vast oil reserves — go easily, a  situation U. S.  Secretary of State Hillary Clinton has called  a 'ticking-time bomb'. 'Bashir doesn't want to be the guy that lost the South and  got nothing out of it.  He's got to have a fairly significant  oil wealth-sharing deal over a course of a number of years  for him to at least get something out of the thing,' said  Prendergast.  All this seems to place the U. S.  — and the deals it can work  out with the Sudanese parties between now and Jan.  9 — in a  critical position.  '[Bashir] doesn't want a new state in the  South appearing and the U. S.  suddenly goes, you know what,  we'll just be good buddies with the people in the South and  let's go for regime change in Khartoum.  This is worst-case  scenario,' said Prendergast. 