When Sri Lanka's External Affairs Minister Gamini Lakshman  Peiris was at the United Nations last month, he challenged  human rights groups to appear before a government-appointed  'Lessons Learnt and Reconciliation Commission' (LLRC) probing  human rights violations during the country's civil war. 'We have asked international groups such as Amnesty  International, Human Rights Watch and the International  Crisis Group to come to Sri Lanka and share their insights,'  he told IPS. 'We are not shutting out anybody.  And we have nothing to  sweep under the carpet,' he said. All three organisations have accused both the Sri Lankan  armed forces and the rebel group, Liberation Tigers of Tamil  Eelam (LTTE), of war crimes and violations of international  humanitarian law - particularly during the final stages of  the conflict last year. The two-decade-old conflict ended with the defeat of the  LTTE in one of the world's longest-running insurgencies. But on Thursday the three groups declined Peiris's  invitation and instead called for 'an international inquiry  into the evidence of war crimes and other abuses during the  civil war'. Madhu Malhotra, Amnesty's deputy director for the Asia- Pacific region, said her organisation would welcome the  opportunity to appear before a 'credible commission of  inquiry aimed at securing accountability and reconciliation  in Sri Lanka'. 'We believe effective domestic inquiries are essential to  human rights protection and accountability.  But the LLRC  falls far short of what is required,' she added.  In an address to the Asia Society of New York, Peiris said  it was wrong to challenge the credibility of the LLRC even  before it came out with its findings. Answering questions about war crimes charges as reported in  the newspapers, he said the same newspapers had made far,  far more serious allegations against other countries - which  he refused to single out by name although it was an implicit  reference to the United States. 'Isn't all of this very, very horrendously selective? Are  these allegations out there only against Sri Lanka?' he  asked. In relation to other countries, he noted, there were much  more vivid and graphic allegations of human rights abuses  and war crimes charges. 'But why isn't there the same line of questioning and the  same intensity'?, he asked. If there are serious allegations, then surely it is part of  the cultural ethos of the United Nations, as reflected in  the charter, that countries be allowed to deal with their  own problems. 'You don't take over somebody's else's problems in a sort of  condescending and patronising spirit on the assumption that  they cannot handle their own problems and you must do it for  them,' he said. That is contrary to the spirit of the U. N.  charter.  'Give  the countries a chance to deal with their own problems,'  said Peiris, a former Rhodes Scholar at Oxford University. 'If somebody makes an allegation couched in language that is  as vague as anything could conceivably be, and the person  making the allegation is refusing to be absolutely specific  - and if that is the basis for triggering processes of this  magnitude, the consequences are going to be profoundly  dangerous not only for little Sri Lanka but also to the rest  of the world,' he declared. Asked about the protection of witnesses giving evidence,  Peiris said there is no objection to the principle of  witness protection.  But he said there is also provision for  evidence to be provided in confidence. In a joint letter Thursday, the three rights organisations  said they would not appear before the commission because 'it  did not meet international standards for independent and  impartial inquiries'. Like its predecessor body, which was also appointed by the  Sri Lankan government last year, the LLRC exists against a  backdrop of continuing government failure to address  accountability and continuing human rights abuses, the  letter added. Amnesty's Malhotra said the LLRC's mandate, its composition,  its procedures, and the human rights environment in which it  is operating all conspire to make a safe and satisfactory  outcome for victims of human rights violations and their  families extremely unlikely. She said Amnesty is particularly concerned about the lack of  any provisions for witness protection and the fact that  former officials who have publicly defended the Sri Lankan  government against allegations of war crimes serve on the  commission. Meanwhile, a three-member U. N.  Panel of Inquiry, currently  in session, is expected to advise Secretary-General Ban Ki- moon on what steps he should take to probe the charges in  post-war Sri Lanka. But Peiris told IPS he was confident the secretary-general  has no plans to ask the U. N.  Panel to probe any allegations  of war crimes in Sri Lanka. 'The secretary-general made it very clear he was not  attempting to do that,' he said. The three-member Panel, which has a four-month time-frame to  report back to Ban, has no investigative powers nor is it  mandated to probe allegations, he added. Peiris also expressed confidence that neither the General  Assembly, the Security Council nor the Human Rights Council  will authorise any such action against Sri Lanka. 'Absolutely not,' he said. 