New information on the Central Intelligence Agency's campaign  of drone strikes in northwest Pakistan directly contradicts  the image the Barack Obama administration and the CIA have  sought to establish in the news media of a programme based on  highly accurate targeting that is effective in disrupting al  Qaeda's terrorist plots against the United States. A new report on civilian casualties in the war in Pakistan  has revealed direct evidence that a house was targeted for a  drone attack merely because it had been visited by a group  of Taliban soldiers. The report came shortly after publication of the results of  a survey of opinion within the Federally Administered Tribal  Areas (FATA) of Pakistan showing overwhelming popular  opposition to the drone strikes and majority support for  suicide attacks on U. S.  forces under some circumstances. Meanwhile, data on targeting of the drone strikes in  Pakistan indicate that they have now become primarily an  adjunct of the U. S.  war in Afghanistan, targeting almost  entirely militant groups involved in the Afghan insurgency  rather than al Qaeda officials involved in plotting global  terrorism.  The new report published by the Campaign for Innocent  Victims in Conflict (CIVIC) last week offers the first  glimpse of the drone strikes based on actual interviews with  civilian victims of the strikes. In an interview with a researcher for CIVIC, a civilian  victim of a drone strike in North Waziristan carried out  during the Obama administration recounted how his home had  been visited by Taliban troops asking for lunch.  He said he  had agreed out of fear of refusing them. The very next day, he recalled, the house was destroyed by a  missile from a drone, killing his only son.  The CIVIC researcher, Christopher Rogers, investigated nine  of the 139 drone strikes carried out since the beginning of  2009 and found that a total of 30 civilians had been killed  in those strikes, including 14 women and children.  If that average rate of 3. 33 civilian casualties for each  drone bombing is typical of all the strikes since the rules  for the strikes were loosened in early 2008, it would  suggest that roughly 460 civilians have been killed in the  drone campaign during that period.  The total number of deaths from the drone war in Pakistan  since early 2008 is unknown, but has been estimated by Peter  Bergen and Katherine Tiedemann of the New America Foundation  at between 1,109 and 1,734.   Only 66 leading officials in al Qaeda or other anti-U. S.   groups have been killed in the bombings.  Reports on the  bombings have listed the vast majority of the victims as  'militants', without further explanation.    The victim's account of a drone attack based on the  flimsiest rationale is consistent with the revelation in New  York Times reporter David Sanger's book 'The Inheritance'  that the CIA was given much greater freedom in early 2008 to  hit targets that might well involve killing innocent  civilians.  The original rationale of the drone campaign was to  'decapitate' al Qaeda by targeting a list of high-ranking al  Qaeda officials.  The rules of engagement required firm  evidence that there were no civilians at the location who  would be killed by the strike. But in January 2008 the CIA persuaded President George W.   Bush to approve a set of 'permissions' proposed by the CIA  that same month which allowed the agency to target locations  rather than identified al Qaeda leaders if those locations  were linked to a 'signature' — a pattern of behaviour on the  part of al Qaeda officials that had been observed over time.  That meant the CIA could now bomb a motorcade or a house if  it was believed to be linked to al Qaeda, without  identifying any particular individual target.  A high-ranking Bush administration national security  official told Sanger that Bush later authorised even further  widening of the power of the CIA's operations directorate to  make life or death decisions based on inferences rather than  hard evidence.  The official acknowledged that giving the CIA  so much latitude was 'risky', because 'you can make more  mistakes - you can hit the wrong house, or misidentify the  motorcade. 'The extraordinary power ceded to the CIA operations  directorate under the programme provoked serious concerns in  the intelligence community, according to one former  intelligence official.  It allowed that directorate to  collect the intelligence on potential targets in the FATA,  interpret its own intelligence and then make lethal  decisions based on that interpretation — all without any  outside check on the judgments it was making, even from  CIA's own directorate of intelligence.  Officials from other intelligence agencies have sought  repeatedly to learn more about how the operations  directorate was making targeting decisions but were  rebuffed, according to the source.  Some national security officials, including mid-level  officials involved in the drone programme itself, have  warned in the past that the drone strikes have increased  anti-Americanism and boosted recruitment for the Pakistani  Taliban and al Qaeda.  New support for that conclusion has  now come from the results of a survey of opinion on the  strikes in FATA published by the New American Foundation and  Terror Free Tomorrow. The survey shows that 76 percent of the 1,000 FATA residents  surveyed oppose drone strikes and that nearly half of those  surveyed believe they kill mostly civilians. Sixty percent of those surveyed believed that suicide  bombings against the U. S.  military are 'often or sometimes  justified'. Meanwhile, data on the targeting of drone strikes make it  clear that the programme, which the Obama administration and  the CIA have justified as effective in disrupting al Qaeda  terrorism, is now focused on areas where Afghan and  Pakistani militants are engaged in the war in Afghanistan.  Most al Qaeda leaders and the Pakistani Taliban leader  Baitullah Mehsud, who has been closely allied with al Qaeda  against the Pakistani government, have operated in South  Waziristan. North Waziristan is where the Haqqani network provides safe  havens to Pashtun insurgents fighting U. S. -NATO troops in  Afghanistan.  It is also where Hafiz Gul Bahadur, leader of a  Pakistani Taliban faction who has called for supporting the  Afghan insurgency rather than jihad against the Pakistani  government, operates.  In 2009, just over half the drone strikes were still carried  out in South Waziristan.  But in 2010, 90 percent of the 86  drone strikes carried out thus far have been in North  Waziristan, according to data collected by Bill Roggio and  Alexander Mayer and published on the website of the Long War  Journal, which supports the drone campaign.  The dramatic shift in targeting came after al Qaeda  officials were reported to have fled from South Waziristan  to Karachi and other major cities.  Meanwhile, the Obama administration was privately  acknowledging that the war would be a failure unless the  Pakistani military changed its policy of giving the Haqqani  network a safe haven in North Waziristan.  When asked whether the drone campaign was now primarily  about the war in Afghanistan rather than al Qaeda terrorism,  Peter Bergin of the New America Foundation's  Counterterrorism Strategy Initiative told IPS, 'I think  that's a reasonable conclusion. ' Bergin has defended the drone campaign in the past as 'the  only game in town' in combating terrorism by al Qaeda.  *Gareth Porter is an investigative historian and journalist  specialising in U. S.  national security policy.  The paperback  edition of his latest book, 'Perils of Dominance: Imbalance  of Power and the Road to War in Vietnam', was published in  2006. 