Desperate to secure supply routes to Afghanistan, the United  States has been spending at least six times more on military  aid for the mostly authoritarian states of Central Asia than  on efforts to promote political liberalisation and human  rights in the region, according to a new report released here  by the Open Society Foundations (OSF). The 45-page report found that the full extent of military  aid controlled by the Pentagon and the U. S.  Central Command  (CENTCOM) and channelled through a bewildering variety of  programmes is uncertain, but that it is at least three times  greater than the State Department's military aid programmes  which are subject to human rights and other conditions. 'Nobody really knows how much military aid the U. S.   government is giving the Central Asian states,' according to  Lora Lumpe, the author of the report, 'U. S.  Military Aid to  Central Asia 1999-2009: Security Priorities Trump Human  Rights and Diplomacy'. 'CENTCOM'S Directorate for Policy and Plans …is likely to  have the fullest picture of U. S.  military assistance to the  region, but those plans are classified,' she noted, adding  that Congressional efforts to obtain comprehensive and  timely reporting on Pentagon spending in the region have  been largely unavailing. The report, which comes six months after the violent  overthrow of the corrupt U. S. -backed government of former  Kyrgyz President Kurmanbek Bakiyev, is likely to spur new  questions about whether the strategic benefits the military  gains in securing access to bases in Central Asia outweigh  the political and other costs in the long term.  In 2007, the Pentagon provided some 30 million dollars in a  variety of aid programmes to the Bakiyev regime — mainly as  compensation for access to the Manas Air Base, according to  the report.  That was roughly six times what it spent on  democracy and civil society programmes. The Pentagon also reportedly awarded exclusive fuelling  contracts - now under investigation both in Bishkek and in  Congress - for U. S.  operations at the base to companies in  which Bakiyev's cronies and son had substantial interests,  contributing to the perception in Kyrgyzstan that Washington  was backing a corrupt and increasingly authoritarian regime.  'Now that Bakiyev has collapsed, there are a lot of really  angry voices in the new government,' said Alexander Cooley,  a Central Asia expert at Barnard College in New York.  'The  Pentagon's 'walking-around money' …may not actually  guarantee access (to the bases) over the long term. ' The 'oversized impact' of the Pentagon - as opposed to the  State Department - on U. S.  foreign policy has become a major  concern of human rights and other critics who claim that  Washington's relations with much of the developing world  have become increasingly 'militarised' since the end of the  Cold War. Six months ago, for example, three Washington-based groups  focused on human rights and Latin America policy published a  report that found that nearly half of all U. S.  aid was being  channelled to the region through the Pentagon and that the  U. S.  Southern Command (SOUTHCOM) had largely displaced the  State Department as the de facto 'lead actor and voice' for  U. S.  policy there. And, although U. S.  development aid to Africa still dwarfs  military assistance, similar fears have been voiced about  the Pentagon's three-year-old African Command (AFRICOM),  which is providing counter-terrorist and counter-narcotics  assistance to dozens of countries, primarily in the Sahelian  region and in East and West Africa. Washington has provided military and police aid at various  times to the Central Asian states - Kazakhstan, Uzbekistan,  Tajikistan, Kyrgyzstan, and Turkmenistan - virtually since  their creation after the collapse of the Soviet Union in  1991. In the early 1990s, military and police assistance focused  mainly on preventing the proliferation of nuclear and  biological weapons, counter-narcotics trafficking, and  border control.  By the end of the decade, aid had expanded in most of the  five countries, as CENTCOM — whose writ runs from Egypt to  China's southwestern border — sent Special Operations Forces  (SOF) to train local troops in counterinsurgency in  increasingly restive Uzbekistan and Kyrgyzstan, and Uzbek  and Kazakh militaries were taking part in NATO exercises. Most of the aid during this period came through traditional  military and security programmes overseen by the State  Department.  Such programmes are subject to Congressionally  imposed restrictions that ban, for example, any assistance  to militaries that commit gross abuses of human rights or  that overthrow democratically elected leaders. The Pentagon and the combatant commands like CENTCOM,  however, came to see State Department programmes as  unreliable, driven more by politics than by what they  regarded as the strategic needs of the U. S.  military,  according to the report.  In a trend that accelerated sharply after 9/11, the Pentagon  developed a parallel system of 'security cooperation'  programmes to provide various forms of assistance that would  not be subject to Congressionally imposed conditions. 'In the years following the 9/11 attacks, the DOD  [Department of Defense] has sought, and Congress has  granted, more than a dozen new legal authorities, increasing  the ways that CENTCOM (and the other regional military  commands) can spend funds from the Pentagon's general  coffers to provide direct assistance to foreign militaries,'  according to the report. As a result, the Pentagon provided at least 103 million  dollars in military-related aid to Central Asian countries  in 2007 — the last year for which the Pentagon provided  relatively comprehensive figures, Lumpe said.  That was nearly three times as much as was provided under  the traditional military aid programmes under the State  Department's control.  Total U. S.  military aid, including the  State Department's programmes, came to nearly half of all  assistance provided by Washington to Central Asia in 2007,  the report concluded. Since 9/11, most U. S.  military assistance has been geared to  securing rights of access to military bases used to ferry  U. S.  troops and material into Afghanistan.  That function has  become significantly more important over the past two years  as the Pakistani Taliban has attacked convoys transporting  supplies from Karachi to Afghanistan.  Since the creation of the Northern Distribution Network  (NDN) in 2008, a land-based supply route for U. S.  and allied  forces that runs from Europe through Central Asia to  Afghanistan, Washington has increased aid to the region's  governments and militaries and, perhaps more importantly,  awarded local companies — most often with close ties to  local regimes — lucrative construction and supply contracts,  including in Afghanistan itself. The Uzbek military and security forces — some of them  trained by the Pentagon - massacred hundreds of protesters  in 2005, Washington cut off new assistance, and Uzbekistan  is the one country in the region where Washington has spent  more on democratisation programmes than on military  assistance. After the aid cut-off, however, the government of President  Islam Karimov bought more than 12 million dollars in  military equipment and training from aid credits that had  already been approved.  With Washington's approval, Tashkent  subsequently bought more than 50 million dollars of weapons  and training directly from U. S.  companies, according to the  report. Despite the lack of improvements in human rights conditions,  the restrictions on military aid 'are beginning to be  relaxed', according to the report. *Jim Lobe's blog on U. S.  foreign policy can be read at  http://www. lobelog. com. 