The U. S. -led invasion and then occupation of Iraq brought a  sharp setback to the rights of women in that country, UNFPA  head Thoraya Obaid tells IPS in an interview. The view that Muslim societies are necessarily backward on  the position of women arises from stereotyping, she says.   And she speaks of herself as a Muslim woman who does not fit  the stereotype. Obaid spoke to IPS Wednesday at the launch of the annual  UNFPA report, focused this year on the role of women in  peace building.  Excerpts from the interview:Q: Is there any evidence that women are better than men at  peace building and rebuilding?  A: There is evidence that not only in peace building and  rebuilding but in other areas as with migrant workers, the  priorities for women are usually different.  As a result  women invest in the family, and during conditions where  there is war or natural disaster, you will find that women  can even cross borders to be able to keep the family  together, and are able to negotiate the safety of their  families.  So in that context we see that women should be a  part of any peace building negotiations. Q: Women can play that role when they have an opportunity,  but is there any sign that women are getting more such  opportunities?  A: Sadly, no.  Opportunities are still limited because the  recognition that women can play that role is still limited.   We are saying that if we invest enough in women, in their  education, in empowering them to have a voice, to raise  their voice, and if we recognise their voices and find space  for them to play a role in peace building, then they will do  a good job. Liberia is a very good example of that.  It's women who walk  the streets saying we want peace.  But society still does not  recognise the real value of women, and that is a real  problem. Q: There is a widespread perception that the position of  women in Islamic societies is low.  But in Iraq women had  many rights, that vanished after the Americans came along.   A: I worked in Iraq for eight years until the invasion of  Kuwait.  We were there as a part of the Economic Commission  for Western Asia, and we worked with women's groups there at  that time, and certainly, by the time we left the Federation  of Iraqi Women had put together the best family laws you can  get from all the different sects, and also labour laws.  But  then the invasion came and the whole thing went apart. When the U. S.  came in, they went back to the family laws of  1958.  That tells you how far they have gone back.  What they  did was to cancel everything that was previous.  And that is  not really a good judgment for women.  It was quite a bit of  difference. Q: How does this square with the perception that left to  themselves, Muslim societies are backward, and that the U. S  is the progressive one?  A: That is a political question in many ways.  There are  stereotypes of Muslim countries, and Muslim women.  I'm a  Muslim woman, and I don't fit that stereotype.  There are  many like me.  I come from Saudi Arabia, and see where I am  right now.  This is the stereotyping of a people and also of  a religion, and as a result assumptions are based on such  perceptions.  In many ways it is perceptions that hinder  Muslim women in many places. Q: Is the U. N.  making a difference, or does it just produce  reports?  A: Look at the report we are putting out on Security Council  resolution 1325.  This has brought the issue of women as  peace makers and peace builders into a higher level of  political awareness.  As a result, at least 19 countries are  putting into place their own plans on how to bring women to  end violence against women in wars, conflict and natural  disasters, in camps and so on.  These studies are important  because they mobilise political leaders and I think that is  a very important role for the United Nations. Q: What does this report say that is significant and new?  A: The new trend we are trying to bring into the discussion  about women is the three R's — Resilience, Renewal, and  Redefining roles.  Women are always seen as victims.  We are  saying women are not victims.  Women have the resilience,  they keep the families together.  And with renewal, when we  are rebuilding after a crisis, we should not rebuild society  as it was before, with all the inequalities and inequities  in it, but on a new human rights paradigm that will bring  equality. Q: How can the MDGs targets be met in relation to conflicts?  A: A part of conflicts is poverty, and poverty brings  conflict.  So MDG 1 on poverty cannot be achieved if there is  no peace and security.  Each of the MDGs requires peace and  security. And with MDG5 on maternal health, for a long time actors in  the humanitarian field did not recognise that women have  special needs.  In war and natural disasters, they do deliver  babies, they do have biological functions that require  special attention.  There is a need to take care of their  integrity and their dignity.  So we are looking at MDG 5  because we want women to deliver babies in a clean state,  and that they are safe.  More importantly [is] that they are protected from violence  - when violence takes place, that they are provided with the  services that support them but also that perpetrators of  violence are brought to justice.  Violence against women is  part of the MDG5 target on universal access to reproductive  health. 