As the United Nations commemorates the 10th anniversary of a  landmark Security Council resolution (1325) on the protection  of women in war zones, a new study details the successes and  failures of a long-drawn-out effort to battle gender-based  violence and provide women a key role in male-dominated  peacekeeping and peace-building operations. 'Women rarely wage war, but they too often suffer the worst  of its consequences,' says Thoraya Ahmed Obaid, executive  director of the U. N.  Population Fund (UNFPA), which released  Wednesday its 108-page annual 'State of World Population' on  the impact of conflicts on women worldwide. In many of today's conflicts, women are disempowered by rape  or the threat of it, and by the HIV infection, trauma and  disabilities that often result from it, she said. Obaid said that experience shows that gender-based violence  does not occur in a vacuum. 'It is usually a symptom of a larger problem, one of failed  institutions, of dangerously skewed gender relations and  entrenched equalities,' she said. War and disaster, she argued, do not cause gender-based  violence, 'but they often exacerbate it or allow it to  strike with greater frequency. 'The UNFPA says its study is based, for the first time, on  reports from the field from countries and territories that  have experienced, or are experiencing, conflicts or  disasters.  These include Bosnia and Herzegovina, Liberia,  Uganda, Timor-Leste, Haiti and the Occupied Palestinian  Territory. Among the many success stories since the adoption of the  1325 resolution in October 2000 are the national action  plans by member states to protect and empower women in  conflict and post-conflict situations. The Philippines wrote its own 1325 action plan; in Colombia,  the UNFPA created a task force to mainstream gender issues  and sensitise the armed forces and police to issues of  gender-based violence. In Nepal, the U. N.  agency is supporting the development of a  national action plan to implement 1325, while in Rwanda it  is supporting the national police force to effectively  address gender-based violence. At the United Nations, Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon,  responding to a request from the Security Council, appointed  in early 2010 Margot Wallstrom of Sweden as the U. N.  Special  Representative on Sexual Violence in Conflict. Last March the United Nations also established an expert  group, co-chaired by former Irish President Mary Robinson,  to coordinate U. N.  support for the implementation of  resolution 1325. Since hundreds of peacekeepers have been accused of rape and  sexual violence in several countries, including Sudan, Haiti  and the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC), the United  Nations has declared 'zero tolerance' on such crimes. Still, the chair of the U. S.  House Foreign Affairs  Committee, Howard Berman, said last year: 'From Congo, to  Bosnia, to Darfur, peacekeepers have been unable to prevent  the use of rape as a weapon of war and even genocide. 'In several peacekeeping missions sexual violence has become  so pervasive that the U. N. 's Department of Peacekeeping  Operations (DPKO) keeps track of such crimes - on a  quarterly basis. During the third quarter of 2010, there were 19 allegations  of sexual exploitation and abuse, of which five concerned  minors. The DPKO said Tuesday that during the first three quarters  of 2010, 64 allegations were reported, compared to 81  allegations during the first nine months of 2009: a decrease  of 21 percent. To counteract the incidence of sexual violence, the United  Nations has also gradually increased the number of women  peacekeepers. 'The proportion of women on the military and police side (in  peacekeeping operations) has grown steadily since resolution  1325 was passed,' says the UNFPA report. At the end of 2006, there were 1,034 women in the uniformed  ranks.  By December 2007, the number had increased to 1,360.   And a year later, there were 1,794. Still, says DPKO, there's 'only a fraction' of women in  uniform compared to a total of more than 86,000 peacekeeping  troops, 2,200 military observers, 13,200 police and 5,830  international civilians. Bangladesh and India, the two top contributors to  peacekeeping operations, also had the largest contingents of  women, including all-female Indian police contingents  assigned to Liberia and an all-female Bangladeshi unit  assigned to Haiti. Pakistan and Nigeria are expected to follow suit with all- women units. Barbara Crossette, the lead author of the UNFPA report and a  former U. N.  bureau chief of the New York Times, told IPS  that national governments are wary of taking seriously the  suggestion to increase women's participation in peacekeeping  forces and also peace negotiations. 'There is nothing that can be done about this.  It is up to  the governments of member states to take these  recommendations seriously,' Crossette said. However, she pointed out, some countries have made gains -  in South Africa, for example, the peacekeeping troops are  largely women.  Nigeria has the highest number of women in  peacekeeping/police. Speaking as a journalist, Crossette said that any objective  person would say it's not effective.  But on the other hand,  what's the alternative? she asked. The fear for many years, especially since peacekeeping  started to grow, is that the United Nations actually had to  beg for peacekeepers. 'As a result, they had to take what they got, but it's  unfair certainly to say that all peacekeepers have been  somehow involved/guilty of something,' Crossette added. She said it's also true to say that there have been some  spectacularly effective peacekeeping contingents. 'I was in Cambodia in the mid-1980s where Bangladesh had a  battalion there that was wonderful.  The locals still think  of them with great affection, they had a commander - it's  the commander often - who said anyone who misbehaves here,  off you go,' she recalled. 'Then the second question is, if they send them home, will  they go on trial? Almost 100 percent no. '*With additional reporting by Kanya d'Almeida. 