Ten years after the Security Council issued its landmark  resolution 1325, designed to address the 'disproportionate and  unique impact of war on women', U. N.  officials and  international human rights advocates say it is high time the  principles it espouses move from paper to reality. Their press conference at U. N.  headquarters Thursday was  also the culmination of Global Open Day - a U. N.  initiative  to synthesise proposals and conversations held in 27  conflict-affected countries from June to September this  year. 'The objective was to put in mind that it's been a good  decade now that we've been pushing for this,' said Anne  Marie Goetz, chief advisor of Governance, Peace and Security  at UNIFEM, 'and it shouldn't have to take a formal occasion  to encourage women's voices to be heard, at all times, in  all decision-making.  [We] must get straight to a new start  in the new decade.  Women count for peace. 'Resolution 1325 is ambitious, comprehensive and far- reaching.  It is the first resolution to formally address the  particular atrocities that women endure in wartime, and to  acknowledge women's indispensible role in conflict  resolution and post-war peace building.  It also recognises the need for participation of women in  justice and security sector reforms, as well as provisions  for safeguarding the land rights, employment and economic  security of women.  Yet on the 10th anniversary of 1325, women's participation  in international and local peace building efforts remains  disgracefully low.  According to reports from the 'Say No - UNiTE' campaign,  less than eight percent of peace negotiators are women; less  than three percent of post-conflict spending is dedicated to  women; and only 14 women in the world currently hold  positions as heads of state. 'When you look at the global trend,' Nepali human rights  adovocate Mandira Sharma told IPS, 'there has been only a  minimum improvement in women's leadership positions - in  that regard there is no reason to celebrate. ' Sharma is executive director of the Advocacy Forum, an  organisation that has played a leading role in defending the  rights of civilians caught between the brutalities of the  Nepali government and the Maoist insurgents.  Harassment, threats and pressure notwithstanding, Sharma and  her team of 50 human rights lawyers continue to fight for  victims of torture, sexual abuse and enforced disappearance.  Sharma is a woman on the front lines of struggle, yet  despite her forthright admission of the resolution's  limitations thus far, she remains hopeful of its potential. 'I think 1325 is a very important tool for activists like us  on the ground to push for the agenda of women in peace  negotiations,' Sharma told IPS.  'It opens up the discourse  in a whole new way and this is really wonderful. ''One of the major problems with implementation is member  states.  You cannot throw the ball into their court.  The U. N  . is accountable - it is a Security Council resolution, after  all,' she noted. 'The fate of most South Asian countries is that our  governments do not take seriously the recommendations of the  U. N.  So we need the U. N.  to be more vocal, to take more  concrete measures and to force the member states to  implement the commitments they make at a national level,'  Sharma said. Unfortunately, the U. N.  in turn is severely hampered by a  lack of funding and inadequate local institutional support.   Addressing a press conference Wednesday on the latest 'State  of World Population' report, Barbara Crossette highlighted  several blocks to implementation at the local level. 'It's easy to sit in New York and say okay, we have 1325, we  have post-conflict plans, we have action plans, we have  everything.  But I always think of the line that was handed  back to me by an African woman.  I said, 'Your country has  resolution 1325' and she said: 'Show me. ''For many observers, the horrific conditions in which women  around the world continue to languish cannot wait years to  be resolved.  Others, like Safaa Elagib Adam, secretary  general of the Community Development Association in  Khartoum, are more patient, placing faith in the slow but  steady turning of the tide. 'Resolutions like this are very important at the grassroots  level,' Adam told IPS, stressing that 1325 is a mechanism,  rather than a solution, in the process of achieving equal  participation of women at the national and international  level of peace building. 'Even without a national platform to ensure its  implementation, 1325 is affecting the Sudanese government  and women are using it as a tool to approach the  negotiations table,' she said. Adam was one of the founding members of the Community  Development Association, an organisation that works for  sustainable peace in Darfur at both the grassroots and  national levels.  The group also works with IDPs, women and  youth on improving their livelihood and achieving economic  stability through vocational trainings and workshops. As a woman activist living in the thick of a conflict zone,  her testimony goes a long way in assessing the condition of  1325. 'Unfortunately, I have to confess that the dissemination and  awareness of 1325 is very low,' she told IPS.  'During the  Abuja Peace Talks, I had a chance to meet with members of  various factions.  They do not believe in 1325.  They believe  that peace talks are a political issue only for men.  That is  their mentality. ''But little by little, as there is more recognition of 1325,  men are reluctantly agreeing to recognise women as part of  the negotiating process. '