Reports over the past 10 days of high-level talks between the  government of Afghan President Hamid Karzai and senior  representatives of the Taliban have spurred growing  speculation here about whether Washington is looking for a  speedy exit to the longest foreign war in its history. The speculation has been fuelled by a number of factors,  including reports that U. S.  and NATO officials have been  actively facilitating the talks by, among other things,  providing safe passage of Taliban leaders to Kabul, and a  spate of news accounts suggesting that U. S.  forces have  finally turned the tide of battle in Kandahar, the Taliban's  most important stronghold. 'We're now at least advocating negotiations and supporting  them; that's major shift from past years,' said Matthew Hoh,  a former Marine Corps captain and State Department adviser  in Afghanistan. Hoh directs the Afghanistan Study Group, a task force of  foreign policy specialists that last month called for  substantially reducing Washington's military commitment and  encouraging a negotiated settlement. 'I'm cautiously optimistic,' he said, adding 'Very  cautiously. 'Contributing to the speculation is the departure of Gen.   James Jones (ret. ) as President Barack Obama's national  security adviser and his formal replacement Friday by Jones'  deputy, Tom Donilon. Donilon was known to be more sceptical about the  counterinsurgency (COIN) strategy recommended by the  Pentagon for Afghanistan and more outspoken in opposing it  before its adoption by Obama late last year.  Considered close to Vice President Joseph Biden, Donilon is  also considered a more 'political' appointment in that he is  closely attuned to Congressional sentiment, particularly  that of Democratic lawmakers who have been pressing Obama  hard to hold to his promise to begin withdrawing U. S.  troops  from Afghanistan in earnest no later than July 2011. Top Republicans, as well as senior military officers, led by  the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Adm.  Mike Mullen  and the U. S.  commander of NATO forces in Afghanistan, Gen.   David Petraeus, on the other hand, have urged Obama to  abandon that deadline or make at most only a token  withdrawal at that time. The speculation about U. S.  Afghan policy comes as cabinet- level U. S.  military and civilian officials met here for  three days with their Pakistani counterparts whose  cooperation in denying safe haven and other forms of support  to the Taliban and al Qaeda is seen here as critical to the  success of Petraeus's COIN strategy. In order to gain that cooperation, Obama, who met personally  with the Pakistani delegation that included Army chief Gen.   Ashfaq Kayani, promised to ask Congress to approve a  military-aid package worth $2 billion over the next five  years, in addition to the nearly $2 billion it is supplying  Kayani's troops this year. At the same time, U. S.  officials warned that Islamabad's  failure to cooperate would result in cuts to both economic  and military assistance, of which Washington is estimated to  have provided more than $3. 5 billion over the past year.  Despite Islamabad's vehement denials, Pakistan's military,  and particularly its Inter-Services Intelligence (ISI)  agency, is widely believed by U. S.  officials to protect and,  in some cases, provide support to various Taliban factions.   This includes the so-called Haqqani faction based in North  Waziristan.  The Haqqanis, in turn, are believed to protect  senior al Qaeda chiefs, with which they are closely aligned.  Last February, the Pakistanis arrested as many as 23 Taliban  leaders, including the reputed number two in the so-called  Quetta Shura, Mullah Ghani Baradar, after the ISI discovered  they were engaged in secret talks with Karzai's government.   Washington apparently learned about these exchanges only  after the men were arrested. Most analysts here believe any peace negotiations between  Karzai and the major Taliban factions cannot succeed without  Pakistan's acquiescence, if not support.  The Pakistanis  reportedly stressed their interest in participating in any  peace talks between the two sides during their visit here  this week. Karzai has long urged opening talks with Taliban leaders and  last spring appointed a High Peace Council, made up of  prominent politicians and warlords, to help in that process. But, until recently, he has received little or no support  from Washington, which has insisted that reconciliation  would be possible only with low- or- mid-ranking militants  who agree to lay down their arms, cut all ties to al Qaeda  and its affiliates, and abide by the relatively liberal  provisions of Afghanistan's constitution. For its part, the Taliban has formally rejected  participating in any peace talks before all foreign forces  withdraw from Afghanistan.  Various factions, including the  Quetta Shura and the Haqqani group, have also denied recent  reports about their involvement in talks. Speculation about a change in U. S.  policy was spurred late  last month when Petraeus told reporters that 'very high- level Taliban leaders …have sought to reach out to the  highest levels of the Afghan government, and, indeed, have  done that. 'It was fuelled this week by a New York Times report that  U. S.  and NATO forces had facilitated 'extensive, face-to- face' discussions in Kabul and elsewhere between the Karzai  government and 'Taliban commanders from the highest levels  of the group's leadership,' including from the shuras based  in Quetta and Peshawar and from the Haqqani group.  In addition to granting safe passage, according to the  report, NATO flew at least one Pakistan-based Taliban  commander from the border to Kabul. No major details of these talks, which have mainly been  described as preliminary and exploratory, have yet emerged,  but analysts here are divided as to their seriousness and  promise. 'There is evidence that there are divisions within the  movement and that some of those (Taliban) leaders may not  have the influence they once did,' said Matthew Waldman, an  Afghanistan expert, at a forum sponsored by the New America  Foundation Thursday. While agreeing that the process is at a very early,  tentative stage, Michael Semple, an Afghanistan specialist  at the Carr Center for Human Rights at Harvard University,  wrote Friday in the Financial Times that they may help  '(lay) the groundwork' for future progress if the U. S.  and  other members of the international community 'invest serious  diplomatic effort in a new political settlement which  enables the insurgent leadership to renounce armed  struggle. 'Despite its more open support for peace talks, it remains  unclear whether Washington, which has long insisted that it  must first reverse the Taliban's momentum before serious  negotiations can get underway, is willing to get behind such  an effort.  In that sense, the sudden spate of reports over the past  week - after months of almost unrelieved bad news on the  military front - that U. S. , NATO, and Afghan forces are  taking control of areas in Kandahar long controlled by the  Taliban, whether accurate or not, suggest that the  administration may indeed be shifting gears. *Jim Lobe's blog on U. S.  foreign policy can be read at  http://www. lobelog. com. 