The publication of a motherlode of secret field reports from  the Iraq War are shining a bright light on heretofore unknown  or underreported suspicions about the power of private  security contractors and the abuse of Iraqi prisoners by their  fellow Iraqis, often with their U. S.  military counterparts  'turning a blind eye'.  The release of the 392,832 documents by Wikileaks — the same  website responsible for the recent release of 77,000 secret  reports covering six years of the Afghanistan War — drew an  immediate response from the Pentagon, as well as efforts by  unfriendly nations to paint the U. S.  military in the most  gruesome possible light. Geoff Morrell, the U. S.  Defence Department press secretary,  strongly condemned both WikiLeaks and the release of the  Iraq documents. 'We deplore WikiLeaks for inducing individuals to break the  law, leak classified documents and then cavalierly share  that secret information with the world, including our  enemies,' he said. Iran's Press TV declared, 'Whistleblower website Wikileaks  has released documents suggesting that the Pentagon  instructed U. S. -led forces to 'secretly' torture detainees  in Iraq. 'The document release also unleashed a flood of bickering  among competing Iraqi politicians.  For example, a senior  member of the Iraqiya bloc led by former Iraqi prime  minister Iyad Allawi called for an investigation into  possible connections between torture operations in Iraqi  prisons and Prime Minister Nuri al-Maliki.  The Mar.  7 parliamentary elections produced a stalemate  between Allawi and al-Maliki, and both are still chasing the  prime minister's job long after the election. The Wikileaks disclosures fall into five categories:  reliance on private contractors; the so-called 'surge', the  addition of 30,000 additional U. S.  troops to work with  willing Iraqis; the deaths of Iraqi civilians - killed  mostly by other Iraqis, but also by the U. S.  military; a  litany of prisoner abuse by Iraqis - from which U. S.   officials sometimes turned a blind eye - even more lurid  than the infamous photographs of torture from Abu Ghraib  prison in 2004; and the 'aggressive' intervention of Iran's  military providing 'weapons, training and sanctuary' to  Shiite combatants.  The Wikileaks documents are sparse on information about  mistreatment of prisoners in U. S. -run detention facilities,  but heavy on the chilling details of abuse of Iraqis by  Iraq's own army and police.  During the period covered by the Wikileaks documents, at  least six prisoners died in Iraqi custody, most of them in  recent years.  Hundreds of reports referenced beatings,  burnings and lashings.  Such treatment appeared to be  considered normal by the Iraqis. According to The New York Times, 'In one case, Americans  suspected Iraqi Army officers of cutting off a detainee's  fingers and burning him with acid.  Two other cases produced  accounts of the executions of bound detainees.  And while  some abuse cases were investigated by the Americans, most  noted in the archive seemed to have been ignored, with the  equivalent of an institutional shrug: soldiers told their  officers and asked the Iraqis to investigate. 'U. S.  military orders said that if U. S.  personnel were not  directly involved in prisoner abuse, U. S.  soldiers need not  take any action.  This order caused U. S.  forces to look the  other way in cases of the abuse of Iraqis by Iraqis. When U. S.  forces discovered and reported abuse, Iraqis  frequently failed to act.  One report said a police chief  refused to file charges 'as long as the abuse produced no  marks'.  Another police chief told military inspectors that  his officers engaged in abuse 'and supported it as a method  of conducting investigations'. The Wikileak documents also show that U. S.  forces sometimes  used the threat of Iraqi brutality to persuade prisoners to  cooperate with interrogators.  It was not until later in the war that some of the worst  examples of Iraqi abuse came to light.  For example, in  August 2009, an Iraqi police commando unit reported that a  detainee committed suicide in its custody, but an autopsy  conducted in the presence of a U. S.  official 'found bruises  and burns on the detainee's body as well as visible injuries  to the head, arm, torso, legs, and neck'.  The report stated  that the police 'have reportedly begun an investigation'. And in December, 12 Iraqi soldiers, including an  intelligence officer, were  caught on video in Tal Afar shooting to death a prisoner  whose hands were tied, The Times reports.  Wikileaks reports that, while the U. S.  forces told the local  Iraqi Army commander, no inquiry was begun because U. S.   soldiers were not involved.  It was not unusual, however, for U. S.  soldiers to intervene.   One U. S.  soldier heard screams in a prison cell and found  two badly dehydrated detainees with bruises on their bodies.   He ordered them out of Iraqi custody. In August 2006, Wikileaks documents show, a U. S.  sergeant in  Ramadi walked into an Iraqi military police station and  found an Iraqi lieutenant using an electrical cable to slash  the bottom of a detainee's feet.  The sergeant stopped him,  but later he found the same Iraqi officer whipping a  detainee's back. One beaten detainee said in 2005 that 'when the Marines  finally took him, he was treated very well, and he was  thankful and happy to see them. ' The Wikileaks documents may increase the scrutiny of the  role of private contractors, whose travails have been widely  publicised since Blackwater (now known as Xe Services) was  accused of opening fire on unarmed civilians in a crowded  main square in Baghdad in 2007 and killing 17 of them.  But the Wikileaks disclosures, while reporting little that  was unknown, paint a far more detailed picture of the  military sea-change that defined the United States'  involvement in Iraq.  The New York Times says, 'The early  days of the Iraq war, with all its Wild West chaos, ushered  in the era of the private contractor, wearing no uniform but  fighting and dying in battle, gathering and disseminating  intelligence and killing presumed insurgents. 'The behaviour of private security contractors in Iraq is  already having serious effects on use of these same assets  in Afghanistan.  Abuses, including civilian deaths, have  driven the Afghan government to attempt to ban most outside  contractors entirely.  Numerous reports have forecast a substantial growth in the  use of security contractors in Iraq as U. S.  forces shrink.  A  July report by the Commission on Wartime Contracting, a  panel established by Congress, estimated that the State  Department alone would need more than double the number of  contractors it had protecting the American Embassy and  consulates in Iraq.  There are still more contractors than members of the  military serving in Afghanistan. WikiLeaks is an international organisation that publishes  anonymous submissions and leaks of otherwise unavailable  documents while preserving the anonymity of sources.  Its  website was launched in 2006.  The organisation has described itself as having been founded  by Chinese dissidents, as well as journalists,  mathematicians, and start-up company technologists from the  U. S. , Taiwan, Europe, Australia, and South Africa.  Julian  Assange, an Australian journalist and Internet activist, is  its director. 