The world's traditional peacemakers - a title long conferred  on women - may be undergoing a gradual transformation. The growing number of female suicide bombers in Iraq,  Afghanistan, Chechnya, Palestine, and until recently Sri  Lanka, and women combatants in Nepal and El Salvador, are  challenging the long-held view that only men take up arms in  war zones. A weeklong debate on the role of women in peace and  security, beginning Monday, coincides with the 10th  anniversary of a landmark Security Council resolution (1325)  calling for a key role for women in peacemaking,  peacebuilding and peacekeeping operations. U. N.  Under-Secretary-General Radhika Coomaraswamy, the  Special Representative for Children and Armed Conflict, told  IPS that girls join armed forces for a variety of reasons. 'Some are just abducted from their homes and forced to join.   They become sex slaves and combatants - witness the Lord's  Resistance Army (in northern Uganda) and the armed groups in  Liberia and Sierra Leone,' she said. In other parts of the world, they join for ideological  reasons. 'Sometimes it is a mixture of both,' said Coomaraswamy, a  former U. N.  Special Rapporteur on Violence Against Women,  who has travelled extensively in conflict zones in Asia,  Africa and Latin America. She said that a young girl in Nepal once told her the  Maoists, leading an insurgency in that country, came to her  school and asked her and her classmates to join the  'resistance'. Coomaraswamy said the girl did join the Maoists because 'she  felt this was expected of young people'. Women reportedly made up about a third of the Maoist forces  during their 10-year armed conflict against the government  of Nepal.  In February, when the Maoists dismantled the  insurgent groups and demobilised 3,000 minors from the  People's Liberation Army, about 1,000 of them were girls. A report released last week by the U. N.  Population Fund  (UNFPA) titled 'From Conflict and Crisis to Renewal:  Generations of Change' points out that feminists have often  argued that women are natural peacemakers and would choose  non-violent solutions rather than conflict, whenever  possible. 'Since ancient times, however, women have gone to war and  the conflicts in contemporary times have involved many  women, by choice or forced recruitment,' it notes. The study, authored by the former New York Times U. N.  Bureau  Chief Barbara Crossette, said that ethnic conflict and  nationalistic or class-related causes have drawn committed  women into civil wars and sometimes terrorism. And high technology warfare waged by developed nations has  attracted women to careers in the military, where they seek  commanding roles in competition with men. The Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE), a ruthless  insurgency group that fought a two-decade battle against the  government of Sri Lanka, was one of the pioneers of suicide  bombers, including female suicide bombers. And up to a fifth of the LTTE cadres were reportedly girls  or women who were frontline combatants. Swati Parashar, a lecturer at the University of Limerick in  Ireland, was quoted in the UNFPA report as saying: 'Women  who support and indulge in both discriminate and  indiscriminate violence against institutions of the state  and unarmed civilians not only redefine notions of  nationalism, gender and religious identity, but also  highlight their complex and problematic relations with  feminism. 'She asks: To what extent does participating in militant  activities and armed combat provide women with opportunities  to transcend conventional gender roles?How are militant women influenced by these political  movements and how do they influence these movements?How does/should feminist international relations approach  these militant women?And an equally important question, says the report, what  happens when the fighting ends?Both Nepal and Sri Lanka are going through processes of  reintegrating former female combatants following an end to  the drawn-out conflicts in the two South Asian countries. According to the UNFPA report, women played several active  roles during the insurgency in Nepal. 'Women were combatants, state security personnel, sole  breadwinners for household, researchers, activists,  journalists and politicians,' it said. The image of women with guns was a new reality in Nepal that  challenged the age-old perception of women as subservient  members of society. After the signing of a peace agreement in 2006, space opened  up for women's participation in peacebuilding, the UNFPA  report said. The study also cites an observation on El Salvador where  'women ex-militants looking back on their lives as fighters  speak of experiencing some kind of liberation from social  restrictions, new sexual freedom and liberation from  conventional perceptions of motherhood; hope of finding a  means of overcoming poverty and oppression and bringing  about a better future. 'However, the realities that peace and demobilisation brought  were very different. The women were separated from their comrades, they lost  their weapons, they had to suddenly go back to their  families and reintegration was difficult. 