A newly released Wikileaks document on Iraq and the new  political alignment between Moqtada al-Sadr and Iraqi Prime  Minister Nouri al-Maliki both provide fresh evidence that Gen.   David Petraeus's war against Shi'a militias in 2007-2008 was a  futile exercise. The Wikileaks document is an intelligence report identifying  the Shi'a commander who Petraeus said was the Iranian-backed  rogue militia leader behind the kidnapping and killing of  five U. S.  troops in Karbala in January 2007.  In fact,  according to the leaked document, it was a Mahdi Army  commander.  That new information about the Karbala operation confirms  earlier evidence that in 2007 a political axis linking Iran,  Sadr and Maliki was working to foil Petraeus's assault on  the Mahdi Army and to hasten the withdrawal of U. S.  troops  from Iraq.  That political alignment is not a reflection of Iranian  dominance over Iraqi politics but of a convergence of  interests among Shi'a actors in the Iraq conflict. The same political alignment has now resurfaced as a pivotal  development in the formation of a new Iraqi government.   Maliki and Sadr have agreed to form a new Shi'a-dominated  government, and Maliki traveled to Iran last week to meet  Sadr and publicly thanked Iran for its help in bringing Sadr  into his bloc of deputies.  The Maliki bloc now has two more votes than the Sunni-based  al-Iraqiya bloc and hopes to bring in the Kurds to collect  enough votes to form a new government. The December 2006 intelligence report in the Wikileaks  collection details a plan to kidnap U. S.  soldiers in  Baghdad.  The report reveals that the militia commander in  charge of the operation, Ashar al-Dulaimi, was a subordinate  to a 'senior Jaysh al-Mahdi [Mahdi Army] commander' named  'Hasan' or 'Salim'. Dulaimi was a key commander of the Mahdi Army's 'secret  cells', which had been trained by Hezbollah officers working  in cooperation with Iran's Islamic Revolutionary Guard  Corps.  Sadr had never hidden his military cooperation with  Hezbollah.  Despite Sadr's open criticism of Iranian policy  toward Iraq for its backing of the rival Islamic Supreme  Council of Iraq (ISCI), he also sent troops to be trained in  Iran. The Mahdi Army plan to kidnap U. S.  troops did not unfold in  Baghdad but in Karbala, where five U. S.  troops were abducted  in a raid on the Provincial Joint Coordination Center Jan.   20, 2007 and later found dead.  The U. S.  military tracked  Dulaimi to Sadr City and killed him in May 2007.  Petraeus's spokesman, Gen.  Kevin Bergner, later accused Iran  of having directed the Karbala attack though it control of  networks of 'Special Groups' armed and trained by Iran.   Petraeus  maintained consistently that Iran was backing  'rogue' units that had left the Mahdi Army. The Wikileaks documents show, however, that Petraeus and his  command in Iraq were well aware that al-Dulaimi was a Mahdi  Army commander in charge of secret operations.  The Petraeus  'Special Groups' line was aimed at hiding the fact that the  U. S.  command was determined to destroy as much of the Mahdi  Army as possible by claiming that it was actually attacking  rogue Shi'a militias. The New York Times story on Iran-related Wikileaks documents  by Michael Gordon, which portrays the documents as  reconfirming the Petraeus line on Iran-backed 'Special  Groups', highlighted the intelligence report on Dulaimi but  omitted the central fact that it clearly identifies him as a  Mahdi Army commander. The evidence also indicates that the Mahdi Army Karbala  operation was done with the full knowledge of the Maliki  government.  Col.  Michael X.  Garrett, then commander of the Fourth  Brigade combat team in Karbala, confirmed to this writer in  December 2008 that the Karbala attack 'was definitely an  inside operation'.  Both the provincial governor and police  chief were suspected of having collaborated in the  operation, Garrett said. Gov.  Aqil al-Khazali was not a Sadrist but a member of  Maliki's own Dawa Party and was presumably acting in line  with a policy that came from Baghdad.  That was a sign that Maliki, Sadr and Iran were still  cooperating secretly, even as Maliki was ostensibly  cooperating with the U. S.  military against Sadr. Maliki maintained ties with Sadr, because he needed his  support.  Sadr, who had 30 members in the Iraqi parliament,  had supplied the key votes that installed Maliki as prime  minister at an April 2006 meeting in the Freen Zone over  which Iranian Quds Force commander Brig.  Gen.  Qasem  Soleimani presided, according to a story by McClatchy  newspapers.  The Mahdi Army had also played the key role in 2006 and  early 2007 on behalf of the entire Shia Alliance in the  pivotal battle of Baghdad against Sunni insurgents by  carrying out an 'ethnic cleansing' campaign against Sunnis  in a number of neighbourhoods. Sadrist deputies had left the government parliamentary bloc  in September 2006, and Sadr attacked Maliki's renewal of the  United Nations mandate for the foreign military presence in  November 2006.  In early 2007, however, Maliki's national security adviser,  Nassar al-Rubaei, told Reuters that they were negotiating on  a proposal for a timetable for withdrawal to heal the rift  with Sadr.  He also expressed dismay at the U. S.  military  desire to 'lure Sadr into direct confrontation'. The Sadrists worked out an arrangement with Maliki under  which U. S.  troops could be kept out of Sadr City.  Iraqi  troops would take the lead in establishing security in the  Sadrist enclave, and U. S.  troops would not intervene unless  there was resistance by the Mahdi Army.  But the U. S.  military refused to honour the agreement and  carried out large-scale sweeps and even airstrikes in Sadr  City beginning in early 2007, claiming that they were only  targeting those 'Special Groups'.  The Mahdi Army command for secret military operations  apparently planned their counter-attack in Karbala in the  hope of having some leverage over the U. S.  military in Iraq.   Even as Maliki was ostensibly agreeing to U. S.  attacks on  Mahdi Army commanders in Sadr City, Petraeus told author  Bing West in September 2007 that the political link between  Maliki and Sadr was far from being broken.  'JAM [Jaysh al- Mahdi] has its hooks into the ministries,' Petraeus told  him.  'It took years to get this point, and it will take some  time to get rid of it.  Maliki is working his way through  it. 'A series of moves from September 2007 to mid-2008 marked the  unfolding of a strategy by Maliki, supported by Iran, to get  Sadr to curb the Mahdi Army's role in order to maneuver the  George W.  Bush administration into negotiating a timetable  for total withdrawal.  Iran prevailed on Sadr to agree to a unilateral ceasefire in  September 2007 and to end fighting in Basra and Sadr City in  late March and early May 2008.  The latter two agreements  prevented U. S.  troops from carrying out major offensives in  both cases.  The quid pro quo for Sadr's agreement to those ceasefires  appears to have been the promise of a U. S.  troop withdrawal.  Maliki's renewal of the alliance with Sadr on the way to  forming a new Shi'a government has brought strong protest  from the Barack Obama administration.  U. S.  Ambassador James  Jeffries has repeatedly said in recent weeks that Sadr's  inclusion in an Iraqi government is unacceptable to  Washington.  But that protest has only underlined the fact that the  United States is the odd man out in the Shi'a-dominated  politics of Iraq. *Gareth Porter is an investigative historian and journalist  specialising in U. S.  national security policy.  The paperback  edition of his latest book, 'Perils of Dominance: Imbalance  of Power and the Road to War in Vietnam', was published in  2006. 