Two revelations await the reader of the Wikileaks section  dealing with civilian deaths in the Iraq War: Iraqis are  responsible for most of these deaths, and the number of total  civilian casualties is substantially higher than has been  previously reported. There were numerous gruesome but seemingly isolated events  that caught the interest and attention of the press and the  public.  For example, on Aug.  31, 2005, more than 950 people  were killed in a stampede on a bridge in Baghdad, after the  crowd had been panicked by a number of earlier attacks.  And  on Aug.  14, 2007, in a rural area near the Syrian border,  truck bombs murdered more than 500 Iraqis. But, even more than these horrendous incidents, the action  that catapulted the mass killings off the charts was a  carefully planned, systematic strategy of religious and  tribal cleansing.  That campaign, Wikileaks says, reached its  zenith in December 2006, which it calls the worst month of  the war. That month saw the deaths of some 3,800 civilians, along  with the killings of about 1,300 police officers, insurgents  and coalition soldiers.  U. S.  soldiers, too, share responsibility for civilian  killings, Wikileaks says.  It reports many instances of U. S.   soldiers killing Iraqi civilians at checkpoints, from  helicopters, and in operations.  Wikileaks says these killings were a central reason Iraqis  turned against the U. S.  presence in their country.  Detailed analyses of the 391,832 documents disclosed by  Wikileaks Friday were published by The New York Times and  several other invited media organisations, based on tens of  thousands of secret field reports from the battlegrounds of  Iraq.  In July, Wikileaks released a smaller number of  reports dealing with the war in Afghanistan.  According to the New York Times account, the current archive  'contains reports on at least four cases of lethal shootings  from helicopters.  In the bloodiest, on July 16, 2007, as  many as 26 Iraqis were killed, about half of them civilians.   However, the tally was called in by two different people,  and it is possible that the deaths were counted twice. ' Later, in February 2007, two Iraqi men believed to have been  firing mortars, even though they made surrendering motions,  were shot and killed by an Apache helicopter.  The action was  taken because, according to a military lawyer cited in the  report, 'they cannot surrender to aircraft, and are still  valid targets. ' However, in three other instances, Iraqis surrendered to  helicopter crews without being shot.  The Times writes that, 'The pace of civilian deaths served  as a kind of pulse, whose steady beat told of the success,  or failure, of America's war effort.  Americans on both sides  of the war debate argued bitterly over facts that grew  hazier as the war deepened. ' While no one really has an exact tally of Iraqi deaths, the  Wikileaks numbers appear to be in line with those of several  sources, including Iraq Body Count.  That organisation used  press reports to track civilian deaths, a method frequently  criticised by the George W.  Bush administration as  unreliable and producing inflated numbers.  In all, the five-year archive lists more than 100,000 dead  from 2004 to 2009, though some deaths are reported more than  once, and some reports have inconsistent casualty figures.  A  2008 Congressional report warned that record keeping in the  war had been so problematic that such statistics should be  looked at only as 'guideposts'. In a statement on Friday, Iraq Body Count, which did a  preliminary analysis of the archive, estimated that it  listed 15,000 deaths that had not been previously disclosed  anywhere.  There are thousands of painful anecdotes of loss about  individuals and their families in the Wikileaks archive.  There were multiple 'misunderstandings' at checkpoints and  these were often lethal.  In one, sunlight reflecting off the  windshield of a car that did not slow down led to the  shooting death of a mother and the wounding of three of her  daughters and her husband.  The Times writes that, 'according to one particularly  painful entry from 2006, an Iraqi wearing a tracksuit was  killed by an American sniper who later discovered that the  victim was the platoon's interpreter. ' The Wikileaks documents provide context for one of the most  heinous crimes committed by U. S.  soldiers, the shootings of  at least 15 Iraqi civilians, including women and children in  the western city of Haditha.  This action, says The New York  Times, 'is misrepresented in the archives.  The report stated  that the civilians were killed by militants in a bomb  attack, the same false version of the episode that was given  to the news media. ' The Wikileaks documents do not detail the main causes of  Iraqi deaths caused by U. S.  soldiers.  And, since these  reports cover the period starting in 2004, they do not  report on civilian deaths caused by the 2003 'Shock and Awe'  bombardment preceding the U. S. -led invasion.  But research by the International Committee of the Red Cross  confirms that 10 civilians die for every soldier killed in  today's wars.  Wikileaks is an international organisation that publishes  anonymous submissions and leaks of otherwise unavailable  documents while preserving the anonymity of sources.  Its  website was launched in 2006.  A member of the U. S.  military, Pfc.  Bradley Manning, has  been accused of providing Wikileaks with the documents  released in July.  Numerous support groups throughout the  U. S.  have called on the U. S.  government to release him and  have decried the evidence of war crimes perpetrated by U. S.   armed soldiers depicted in the logs and videos released by  Wikileaks. Protesters affirmed that if Bradley Manning is the source of  the leaks, he deserves the gratitude of the entire world and  should be heralded as a hero for his sacrifice. He also has the support of Daniel Ellsberg, the Defence  Department official who in 1967 leaked the so-called  'Pentagon Papers' to the New York Times.  The top-secret  documents revealed some of the untruths and deceptions that  senior government officials foisted on the U. S.  public to  win approval for the Vietnam War.  