Afghanistan will not know peace until women are equal  participants in negotiations, stresses a report released  Thursday by the University of Notre Dame's Kroc Institute for  International Peace Studies. 'We don't want the world to see us as victims,' said Afifa  Azim, general director of the Afghan Women's Network, which  is working in collaboration with the Kroc Institute.   'Afghani women must be at the table if the peace process is  to move forward.  No women, no peace. 'Co-authored by David Cortright and Sarah Persinger, the  report entitled 'Afghan Women Speak: Enhancing Security and  Human Rights in Afghanistan' was presented as part of the  week-long Peace Conference commemorating the 10th  anniversary of U. N.  Security Council Resolution 1325 on  Women, Peace and Security.  The report includes some 50 interviews with women leaders,  parliamentarians, activists, school principals, NGO and  health workers, army officials and police officers in the  field in Kabul, Afghanistan, from April to May of 2010. Since United States-led forces overthrew the Taliban in  2001, critics say Washington has dangled the question of  women's emancipation over the head of the international  community, using it to justify prolonged military  occupation. Pundits and policy-makers in the West have largely swallowed  this argument, taking up the fight for Afghan women with  great gusto while continuing to support U. S.  and NATO troops  in the Middle East. But such oversimplified arguments pose more of a threat than  a salvation to Afghan women, many say. 'The women are aware that their rights are being manipulated  for political purposes that have nothing to do with their  socio-economic, political privileges,' Cortright, director  of policy studies at the Kroc Institute, told IPS.  'Women  are incredibly suspicious of these attempts to justify  militarised policies. 'Presenting his report at the United Nations Church Plaza on  Thursday, Cortright stressed that in order for the  international community to work towards a sustained and  equitable peace process, the U. S.  and its allies must  withdraw from Afghanistan immediately.  'It is clear that the presence of foreign troops is driving  the insurgency,' he said.  'We have seen that the longer the  occupation goes on, the worse the threat to human security,  the greater the number of civilian deaths and the stronger  the insurgency becomes. ' The only question, according to Cortright, is how to pull  out without hampering the meagre gains that the women's  movement has made in the last decade. Persinger, a research associate at the Kroc Institute,  cautioned that any policy change must not undermine the  tremendous strides that have been taken towards women's  emancipation in Afghanistan since the penetration of Western  troops.  Several of her interviewees expressed strong opinions about  improvements in education, access to healthcare and economic  and political participation of women after the Taliban lost  some ground. What this recent report makes clear, however, is that for  most women in Afghanistan, the ongoing war is akin to being  caught between the devil and the deep blue sea.  The authors  state that it will be 'impossible for women and girls to  consolidate their power in a militarised environment'. The report goes on to note that 'the climate of impunity and  insecurity has produced new forms of powerlessness for  Afghan women and girls. . .  who have been widowed, displaced,  trafficked and forced into marriage as a result of the  conflict. 'Because of honour codes about women enshrined in Sharia law,  the violence and turbulence in Kabul following the U. S.   invasion has led to the cloistering of female family  members, a practice that is severely detrimental to women's  freedom of movement.  Many are not allowed to leave their homes, even to go to  school.  Since the Taliban has largely resorted to attacks on  the civilian population in response to foreign military  presence, schools and medical facilities have taken a severe  beating.  According to the report, virtually every school in  the Khost province has been destroyed.  While historically women's turnout in elections has been as  high as 45 percent, the 2009 election, which took place  under the auspices of various foreign observers, saw a  paltry 20 percent turnout. Thus what is particularly worrying about backdoor peace  talks involving the Taliban is that women's voices will not  be heard. 'Peace does not mean the absence of guns,' Aziz told IPS.   'Peace must happen in all spheres of social, domestic life.   And this means equal representation for women in the peace  talks. 'One of the recommendations the report puts forward is the  establishment of a Muslim-led interim government, to oversee  the withdrawal of Western troops while simultaneously  working closely with women to ensure an equitable transition  to peace.  'The problem is not Sharia law,' Aziz noted, 'but  the Talibanisation of Sharia law. 'Cortright suggested that the Organisation of the Islamic  Conference could play a crucial role during this period.  The  report also stressed that a decrease in troops must be met  with an increase in aid commitments for education and health  care. In the meantime, many women remain sceptical and fearful  about the future. One Afghan woman, speaking on condition of anonymity, said  that Sharia law makes it almost impossible to even conceive  of fundamental freedoms such as reproductive, educational  and social rights. 'How can we hope to be represented at peace talks when we  are not even allowed to be treated in a hospital? It will  not happen,' she told IPS. Regardless of differing opinions, it seems to be universally  acknowledged that the success of resolution 1325 depends on  how it responds to the needs of the women in Afghanistan. Azim appealed to the U. N.  to take seriously the precarious  nature of the situation. 'Without the support of the entire international community,  women will not see peace in Afghanistan,' she told IPS. 