A campaign to rid the world of cluster munitions has still to  rope in the U. S.  government, a major producer and stockpiler  of the deadly payload, on the eve of a key global conference  in Laos to ban its production and use.    The mixed messages that Washington has been sending are  expected to hover over the historic cluster munitions  conference to be held Nov.  9-12 in Laos, a poverty-stricken  South-east Asian country still grappling with the legacy of  the bombs dropped by U. S.  warplanes four decades ago.    Thus far, there are little signs that a U. S.  government  delegation will be attending the meeting as observers.    'We are hoping they (the U. S.  government) will send a  delegation even at the last moment,' says Thomas Nash,  coordinator of the Cluster Munitions Coalition (CMC), a  global network of civil society groups that have thrown  their weight behind the world’s newest disarmament treaty,  the Cluster Munitions Convention.    'The U. S.  government is well aware of the problem in  Laos,' Nash told IPS ahead of the first international  conference that follows the U. N.  disarmament treaty’s coming  into force in August 2010.    The inaugural meeting of the state parties to the  Convention on Cluster Munitions, as it is formally known, is  expected to bring delegates from over 100 countries and  activists from nearly 400 non-governmental organisations to  the Lao capital, Vientiane.    Washington’s absence is of little surprise in light of  the distance that the U. S.  government has put between itself  and this latest international law, which is meant to save  lives that continue to be lost long after cluster munitions  have been dropped.    'The U. S.  did not directly participate, even as an  observer, in the diplomatic Oslo Process in 2007 and 2008  that resulted in the Convention on Cluster Munitions,'  reveals the ‘Cluster Munition Monitor 2010’, a report  released in the Thai capital on the eve of next week’s  meeting.    'The U. S.  did not engage in the work of the convention in  2009 and 2010 … (nor did it) attend the Berlin Conference on  the Destruction of Cluster Munitions in June 2009,' added  the 286-page report, which seeks to monitor the ban on the  production, trade, stockpiling, use, as well as the impact  of the cluster munitions.    Yet even though it is not a signatory to this disarmament  treaty, Washington supports a range of humanitarian  programmes coping with the legacy of cluster munitions in  concert with NGOs.  Landlocked Laos itself has been receiving  such assistance since the mid-1990s, with the U. S.   reportedly pumping in two million dollars annually for  initiatives to clear cluster bombs.    'The United States has been the largest contributor to  clear cluster munitions in Laos,' says Stephen Goose,  executive director of the arms division at Human Rights  Watch (HRW), the New York-based global rights lobby.  'The  U. S.  insists on using the weapons but also spends money to  clear up the mess afterwards. '   But this paradox in U. S.  government policy toward cluster  munitions also cuts the other way, reveals Goose, who is  also the editor of the ‘Cluster Munition Monitor 2010’.   'Most of Washington’s NATO (North Atlantic Treaty  Organisation) allies have joined the convention and they are  bound not to help the U. S. ' in keeping or transporting these  weapons, he adds.    This means that Washington’s European military allies  'cannot help refuel trucks or planes carrying these weapons  for the U. S. ,' Goose says.    Washington, however, is not alone among the world’s  producers and stockpilers of cluster munitions that have not  signed the disarmament convention, which was opened for  signature in December 2008 and has secured endorsements from  108 countries.    China, India, Pakistan, Israel, and Russia are among the  biggest producers of cluster munitions that have given the  new convention the cold shoulder.    Laos has been at the vanguard of this campaign to give  the international treaty more teeth in Asia, becoming the  first in the continent to ratify the convention.  But only  four other countries in the region have signed and ratified  the treaty — Fiji, Japan, Samoa and New Zealand.    Lao government officials are hoping the November event  will help secure more ratifications from South-east Asia,  which is among the regions most affected by cluster  munitions decades after U. S.  military intervention there.    Apart from Laos, neighbouring Vietnam and Cambodia were  targets of cluster munitions during the U. S.  government’s  war in Vietnam, which Washington lost in 1975.    During that conflict, U. S.  warplanes dropped more than  two million tonnes of bombs over Laos, an amount that  according to U. N.  data exceeds the explosives dropped in  Europe during World War II.    These air strikes, involving close to half a million  bombing missions from 1964 to 1973, were meant to destroy  the North Vietnamese supply route, called the Ho Chi Minh  Trail, that passed through eastern Laos.    An estimated 270 million of these explosives were cluster  munitions, called ‘bombies’ in Laos.  After being dropped  from larger bombs that contained 300 to 600 cluster bombs,  the bombies spread across a large terrain and caused damage  there.    But there were also millions of bombies that did not  explode after they were dropped, and these continue to exact  a heavy toll today.  More than 50,000 people were killed or  injured in unexploded ordnance (UXO) accidents between 1968  and 2008, states a UXO regulatory body in Laos.    'Laos topped the list of cluster munition casualties in  2009,' says Goose.  'It accounted for a third of the  casualties that year. ' 