On the tenth anniversary of a groundbreaking U. N.  resolution,  a conference on 'Women and War' opened here Wednesday to  discuss the disproportionate impact violent conflict has on  women and possible ways to prevent these atrocities. 'I'm often told sexual violence in war and conflict is  unavoidable, that it should be considered collateral  damage,' Margot Wallström, the U. N. 's Special Representative  on Sexual Violence in Conflict, said at an event held in  World Bank headquarters Wednesday. People say it is nothing new and point to anecdotes from the  Iliad, the Bible and all the way up to the countless  examples among the conflicts of the past several decades,  she said, 'But I want to say we cannot and should not accept  this.  Sexual violence in conflict is neither cultural nor  sexual, actually; it is criminal.  No other human rights  violation is routinely dismissed as inevitable. 'Over the past 10 years, international organisations have  gradually woken up to both the magnitude of this problem and  the fact that they have historically not paid it enough  attention. Wallström herself is evidence of this slow but steady  awakening.  In April, she became the first person to hold her  sexual violence-focused position at the U. N.  Ten years  earlier, she had helped urge the U. N.  Security Council to  adopt resolution 1325, a landmark resolution that reaffirmed  the critical role of women in peace-building and  reconstruction and urged parties to protect women and girls  from gender-based violence. That resolution is seen as the first time the Security  Council recognised that war affects women and men  differently. In June 2008, the Security Council went a step further and  adopted resolution 1820, focusing on sexual violence in  armed conflict and recognising for the first time that  sexual violence is a tactic used in war and a force  impacting international peace and security — and thus within  the Security Council's purview. This week's conference commemorates the 10 years since the  unique challenges posed to women by war and conflict were  first acknowledged.  Its organisers, including the United  States Institute of Peace, the World Bank, several  universities and the U. S.  State Department, hope it will  help deliver concrete actions that can be taken to achieve  the principles behind resolution 1325. Toward that goal, it is focusing on the experiences of  victims and many different ways in which other women and  girls might avoid their nightmares. In August, details emerged of a mass rape in villages in the  eastern Democratic Republic of Congo, known as the 'rape  capital of the world' due to the widespread practice of  using rape as a weapon.  There, not even 80-year-old women or  young children were safe from the rebel assailants.   Congolese troops are also known to be perpetrators. 'Sexual violence in conflict has become the weapon of  choice.  The reason is as simple as it is wicked — because it  is cheap, silent and effective,' says Wallström. All told, over 200,000 rapes have been reported in the DRC,  but, as Wallström points out, for each rape reported, 10 to  20 go unreported. And the ongoing conflict in the DRC is only the most widely- known example.  Speakers at the conference Wednesday also  mentioned the fighting in Kosovo last decade and the camps  that have been set up in Haiti following January's  earthquake as places where conflict and disruption have  given rise to a terrifying rate of sexual violence. Lisa Davis, human rights advocacy director for the group  MADRE, says rape in the Haitian camps is 'pervasive,  consistent and egregious'.  Every time she goes to Haiti, she  says, she hears of a victim who was attacked yesterday or  the day before. One victim, Davis says, was gang-raped in a car and choked  so hard that her tongue came out and the perpetrators bit it  off. She says solving these egregious crimes is not too  difficult, but requires working together to improve  security, lighting and medical care in the camps.  In order  to do that correctly, though, she says grassroots groups  must be involved in determining the tactics that will make a  difference, such as distributing whistles with directions  explaining how to use them or solar torches rather than  battery-powered ones that will be useless once the batteries  run out. Gary Baker, director of gender, violence and rights at the  International Center for Research on Women, says that group  education sessions run by well-trained men and women have  been shown to be effective but are slow and expensive. He also points to campaigns that do not just say gender- based violence is against the law but try to deconstruct  what it means to be a man or woman — thus promoting the idea  of being a more virtuous man — and models where men and  women from a community are able to hold each other  accountable for violence, 'so that the justice is coming  from within the community. 'Other measures discussed included community liaison offices  to work with local populations, foot patrols to accompany  women when they might be vulnerable to attack, and training  peacekeepers on how to report and react to sexual violence. For now, though, 'primary prevention of sexual violence has  been marginalised in favour of providing services to  victims,' says Marya Buvinic, who works on gender and  development at the World Bank.  Wallström says she will use her mandate at the U. N.  to end  impunity for perpetrators of sexual violence and make sure  amnesty is not an option, to give women more of a voice  especially in post-conflict reconstruction, and to better  coordinate the U. N.  system with regard to its response to  rape. 'Much more must yet be done to promote actions that have  real impact as we move from recognition to action and from  best intentions to best practice,' she says. 