Andrew J.  Bacevich emerged in the first decade of the century  as this country's most widely read and widely respected critic  of U. S.  militarism and empire. He has addressed this issue with an intensity that is  unprecedented for an academic.  With the appearance of  'Washington Rules: America's Path to Permanent War', he has  produced six books illuminating these themes in just eight  years, writing three previous books — 'American Empire'  (2002), 'The New American Militarism' (2005), and 'The  Limits of Power' (2008), and editing two other volumes, 'The  Imperial Tense' (2003) and 'The Long War' (2006). In attracting a broad readership to his critique of U. S.   militarism, Bacevich has transcended both the arid tone of  most academic writing on the history of foreign and military  policy and the right-left divide over social and political  values.  As a former army officer, a Catholic and a social  conservative from the Midwest, he has appealed to both  conservatives and progressives unhappy with the militarised  pursuit of power abroad and the encouragement of unlimited  individual self-gratification at home.  He has argued that the all-volunteer army is the nexus  between these twinned developments in U. S.  society and  global policy.  As if to confirm the crucial importance of  the all-voluntary army to the system of U. S.  militarism,  former George W.  Bush speechwriter Michael Gerson has just  recounted in the Washington Post Oct.  29 the strong negative  reaction of military officers at a recent dinner to the idea  of restoring the draft.  The military elites believe it must  have the mission of fighting terrorism 'even when our  attention lags or turns inward', because 'They are not like  the rest of America…. 'In 'Washington Rules', Bacevich offers a series of  ruminations on how and why the United States has come to  what he calls 'a condition approximating perpetual war…. ' He  begins by positing a consensus held firmly by the U. S.   political, business, foreign policy and media elite ever  since the end of World War II consisting of what he calls  'the sacred trinity' of principles: global U. S.  military  presence, global power projection and global  interventionism. Bacevich argues that the 'socialisation' of the political  and intellectual elite into this catechism has been so  complete that U. S.  citizens 'have essentially forfeited any  capacity to ask first-order questions about the fundamentals  of national security policy'.  He cites as exhibit one in his  case for such vacuous discourse on the subject of national  security the dismissive treatment of Dennis Kucinich (on the  left) and Ron Paul (on the right) because of their refusal  to endorse the catechism during the 2008 presidential  primaries. Because of the absence of any serious challenge to this  catechism of global exertion of U. S.  power over the decades,  Bacevich argues, the U. S.  populace had come by the turn of  this century to 'accept the use of force as routine'.  That  was the deeper shift in attitudes that allowed the Bush  administration to capitalise so easily on the 9/11 terrorist  attacks to take the United States into the present situation  of 'permanent war'. This book marks a new analytical approach to the problem  which his riveted him these past several years.  In 'The New  American Militarism', Bacevich had sought explanations for  the militarism of the post-Vietnam period in the right-wing  reaction to Vietnam-era radicalism, the rise of the  Christian right, and the 'cultural and intellectual currents  emblematic of the postindustrial or postmodern mood' ('the  end of history', globalisation, virtual reality, the CNN  effect, etc. ).  In 'Washington Rules', however, he probes  more deeply the nature of the national security state itself  in search of causation. Bacevich cites as a 'partial explanation' for the John F.   Kennedy administration's obsession with Cuba the way in  which domestic U. S.  politics provide incentives for  presidents to rely on force merely to inoculate themselves  from criticism by the opposition (either from the opposing  party or within the Republic party itself) for being 'weak'.   That same factor obviously applies to a wide range of  presidential decisions on military and foreign policy. But Bacevich gives even more attention to the personal and  institutional interests of the military and civilian  national security elites in creating their own 'empires'.  In  sketches of the roles played by CIA director Alan Dulles and  commander of the Strategic Air Command Air Force Chief of  Staff Curtis LeMay during the Cold War, Bacevich observes  that both those pivotal figures lobbied the White House for  policies (covert operations and investments in massive  numbers of bombers and nuclear weapons, respectively) that  benefited their institutions and conferred prestige and  power on them personally. Of LeMay, Bacevich writes that his 'concern for the well- being of the United States blended seamlessly with his  devotion to the well being of the institution he led. 'In making that point, Bacevich has aligned his perspective  on the U. S.  national security state with two seminal works  on the national security state - Richard Barnet's 'Roots of  War' (1971) and Morton Halperin's 'National Security  Policymaking' (1975) - both of which argued that national  security officials automatically conflate the interests of  their national security organisation with those of the  nation.  That conflation of interests is the key to the problem of  errant U. S.  military policies, because it allows national  security officials to pursue policies and programmes that  are sharply at odds with the interests of the U. S.  public  without the slightest discomfort. In discussing the U. S.  descent into the Vietnam imbroglio,  Bacevich eschews single-factor explanation, referring to a  litany of personal, political, perceptual and cultural  factors that impinged on U. S.  policy.  But he also invokes a structural factor with broader  explanatory power: the determination of the Cold War  policymakers and their respective institutions to maintain  'Washington rules' rather than allow them let them to be  supplanted by alternative approaches to national security — approaches that would require less power, prestige and  resources for themselves and their agencies. 'To those whose interests were served by preserving that  strategy, this was an intolerable prospect,' writes  Bacevich. In his concluding chapter, Bacevich returns to this pivotal  concept of personal and institutional self-interest as a  driving force in the militarisation of U. S.  policy but  broadens it even further. 'Who benefits from the perpetuation of the Washington  rules?' he asks.  In answering that question, he describes a  socio-political-bureaucratic system that delivers 'profit,  power and privilege to a long list of beneficiaries: elected  and appointed officials, corporate executives and corporate  lobbyists, admirals and generals, functionaries staffing the  national security apparatus, media personalities and policy  intellectuals from universities and research organizations. 'Although Bacevich does not develop this explanatory approach  in detail, his emphatic statement of the thesis that a  powerful and broadly-defined self-interested elite is now  driving the system of 'permanent war' offers hope for a U. S.   political movement to curb this militarism. A central weakness of that movement in the past has been the  absence of a common analysis of the problem.  Bacevich's  embrace of this new paradigm of self-interest of the  national security state and the political and private sector  elites associated with it could provide the juice for a  stronger and more effective campaign at a time when the  system is more vulnerable politically than ever before.  *Gareth Porter is an investigative historian and journalist  specialising in U. S.  national security policy.  The paperback  edition of his latest book, 'Perils of Dominance: Imbalance  of Power and the Road to War in Vietnam', was published in  2006. 