When the Shah of Iran, a strongly pro-U. S.  ally, was ousted  from power after the Islamic Revolution in 1979, the  stridently anti-U. S.  regime of Ayatollah Khomeini that  captured power also inherited a military bonanza: billions of  dollars worth of state-of-the-art weapons provided by the  United States. The U. S.  equipment in the Iranian military arsenal at that  time included some of the most advanced jet fighters and  reconnaissance aircraft of that generation: McDonnell  Douglas F-4D and F-4E Phantoms, Grumman F-14A Tomcats,  Lockheed P-3F Orions, along with Sidewinder and Harpoon  missiles and M47 Patton and M60 battle tanks. The U. S.  administration's decision last month to sell  billions of dollars worth of weapons to potentially unstable  Arab nations in the Gulf - including Saudi Arabia, the  United Arab Emirates (UAE), Oman, Kuwait, Qatar and Bahrain  - have triggered fears of possible risks to the United  States, if history repeats itself. The biggest single arms deal — up to 60 billion dollars  worth of weapons to Saudi Arabia - has been described as the  largest in U. S.  history. According to the Government Accountability Office (GAO), the  nonpartisan investigative arm of the U. S.  Congress, about  $40 billion in arms transfers was authorised to the six Gulf  countries between 2005 and 2009, with Saudi Arabia and the  UAE as the largest recipients. Pieter Wezeman, senior researcher in the Arms Transfers  Programme at the Stockholm International Peace Research  Institute (SIPRI), told IPS there have been several  concerns, most notably relating to Saudi Arabia. 'It is difficult for me to make a proper assessment of the  risk that the Saudi royal house could be toppled and an  anti-American or anti-Western government could take over,'  he said.  However, the question is a relevant one, he added, as  illustrated by the example of Iran and possibly Iraq in the  future. 'Iran still uses U. S. -supplied equipment as part of the  backbone of its armed forces,' said Wezeman. In the case of Iran, large and expensive U. S.  arms supplies  became a symbol of U. S.  support for the oppressive regime of  the Shah and this could be used against him by his  opponents, he added. 'It therefore also remains a question how major spending on  arms is perceived by the general population in the Gulf  States,' he said. Despite their role as major suppliers of arms to Iraq in the  1980s, it turned out that countries like France and Russia  had little leverage over Iraqi President Saddam Hussein in  1990. The absence of political leverage contradicted one of the  arguments used to justify arms sales, namely that arms  suppliers could tighten the screws by refusing spares and  providing maintenance, according to some defence analysts. Dr.  Natalie J.  Goldring, a senior fellow with the Center for  Peace and Security Studies in the Edmund A.  Walsh School of  Foreign Service at Georgetown University, told IPS that  perpetuating the arms race cycle in the Gulf region has  numerous risks. 'One continuing issue is the stability of the Saudi kingdom.   If the government falls, we risk adversaries gaining access  to sophisticated U. S.  weaponry,' she said. Goldring was also critical of the rash of new defence  contracts with Middle Eastern nations, including Israel.   'The [Barack] Obama administration seems to be taking one  step forward and two steps backward on arms sales,' she  said. Last year, the administration announced that it would join  negotiations toward an Arms Trade Treaty, designed to  establish international standards for arms sales.  The  decision was a welcome reversal of George W.  Bush  administration policy, Goldring pointed out. But now, Saudi Arabia has been offered the opportunity to  buy more than 60 billion dollars worth of advanced fighter  aircraft and military helicopters, as well as various  missiles, bombs and other munitions.  This announcement sends  precisely the wrong message to the region, she said. 'This package says that its business as usual in the Middle  East, fueling yet another round in the regional arms race,'  she said. The proposed sale to Saudi Arabia has received a great deal  of media attention, perhaps in part because of its enormous  size.  But far less attention seems to have been given to the  Israeli government signing a recent contract for the new F- 35 Joint Strike Fighter, said Goldring. The F-35 contract is less than $3 billion, a relatively  small dollar value when compared to the Saudi proposal.  But  the F-35 is the next generation of fighter aircraft, and  hasn't even been deployed with U. S.  forces yet, she noted.  If past patterns hold, said Goldring, supplying the F-35 to  Israel at the same time that it is being deployed with U. S.   forces will also produce pressure to design the next  generation of fighter aircraft — fuelling the upward spiral  of military spending, as well as the Middle East regional  arms race. SIPRI's Wezeman told IPS the large sums of money spent by  several Gulf states obviously mean a risk of major waste. Such spending, he pointed out, would need to be accompanied  by adequate accountability to determine if and how the  spending is connected to clearly established objectives: to  prevent that money is not wasted on unneeded equipment, to  ensure that other sectors are not neglected and to prevent  corruption. However, there is basically no transparency in arms  procurement in the region, he said. In finalising massive arms deals, the United States has  hinted that these are primarily meant to strengthen defences  against a potentially nuclear-armed neighbour: Iran. Wezeman said a key question is how arms-supplying states  have made their assessments with regard to the risks  involved in supplying arms to Gulf states. These include future unintended use of the arms within or  between countries; the effect on public opinion in the Gulf  region of high military expenditure and the diversion of  resources away from other sectors; and what Iran might do  under pressure of arms supplies to its neighbours. Iran could either be deterred or be more convinced of a  threat from the United States and its Gulf allies, and  therefore divert more resources into the military to defend  itself, he argued. Goldring said the independent GAO has recently raised  significant concerns over oversight of U. S.  arms transfers.    Neither the U. S.  State Department nor the Department of  Defence (DOD) consistently documented how arms transfers to  Gulf countries advanced U. S.  foreign policy and national  security goals. Announcing a major sale before these concerns have been  resolved is another indication that the Obama administration  isn't giving enough attention to the possible short- and  long-term costs of arms sales, in terms of regional arms  races and instability, said Goldring.  'Business as usual is the wrong approach,' she declared. 