Eighteen-year-old Phongsavath Manithong rubbed his eyes with  the back of his arms as he described how his life changed  forever.    He was not even born yet when U. S.  military pilots  dropped millions of tiny explosives onto Laos.  But almost  four decades after war ended for this South-east Asian  nation, it is people like him who still suffer.    Three years ago, Phongsavath stumbled onto a small,  metallic sphere buried in the ground near his school.    He had heard stories about the planes that rumbled  overhead decades before, dropping fire from the sky.  But he  had never before seen a bomb, or held one in his hands.  'I didn’t know what it was.  I didn’t think it would be  dangerous.  So I tried to open it,' Phongsavath recalled.    That decision changed his life forever.  Phongsavath  remembers only seeing a flash of light before his world fell  dark.  When he awoke in a hospital, he was blind.  The bomb  had robbed him of his eyesight and ripped away both his  hands.    The weapon was part of a decades-old cluster bomb that  had been dropped on Laos during the U. S.  military’s  secretive operations in Indochina between 1964 and 1973.  The  goal of the air strikes had been to destroy the crucial  North Vietnamese Army supply line that snaked its way  through Laos and Cambodia on its way to the south.  By the  time the war was over, those aerial campaigns entrenched  Laos as the most heavily bombed country in history.    But today, it is people like Phongsavath who are paying  the price for that conflict.  Since the war ended, more than  20,000 people in this country have been killed or injured by  leftover explosives.     Critics take particular aim at so-called cluster bombs —  large explosives dropped from the sky, which contain  hundreds of smaller submunitions, or ‘bombies’, as they are  referred to in Laos — because they are especially deadly to  civilians long after military hostilities have ended.     Estimates suggest more than 270 million individual  bombies were scattered over Laos.  With a failure rate  estimated at around 30 percent, these deadly weapons litter  the Lao countryside.    But advocates hope that 2010 represents a turning point  in a long-running campaign to eradicate cluster bombs.  In  August, a treaty banning the use of cluster bombs came into  effect.  Starting Nov.  9 here in Vientiane, delegates from  more than 100 countries are taking part in the first high- level meeting of signatory nations since then, aiming to  hammer out a plan to implement the landmark accord.     'The horrifying thing is there may be up to 80 million of  these bombs scattered around the countryside, in farmers’  fields, next to schools, beside roads,' said Thomas Nash,  coordinator for the Cluster Munition Coalition, a broad  group of civil society organisations who have pushed for the  wide-reaching ban.  'So there’s a huge amount of work to be  done to clear this country of the deadly legacy from a war  that ended over 35 years ago. '   Laos is seen, per capita, as the most heavily affected  country by such munitions.  But cluster bombs have riddled  conflict-ridden countries around the globe, from Angola to  Zambia and Lebanon to Libya.    The 108 nations that have signed on to the Convention on  Cluster Munitions have committed to banning the use of the  weapons and the eventual destruction of existing stockpiles.   They have also made broad pledges to clear contaminated land  and provide adequate aid to victims of cluster bombs.    But while heavily affected countries like Laos have  ratified the treaty, major military players that still  stockpile the weapons — the United States, China and Russia,  for example — have not.     Advocates like Nash, however, are hoping the convention  will serve to stigmatise the weapons enough so that their  use is considered untenable — something he believes has  already been accomplished with landmines.    The United States, for example, has not signed on to the  Ottawa Treaty, which banned the use of landmines and came  into effect more than a decade ago.  But it is believed that  the U. S.  military has not deployed the weapons since the  first Gulf War.    'Anti-personnel mines have been eradicated from most  military arsenals and we believe the same will happen with  cluster munitions,' Nash said.    'You cannot win a political war if you kill civilians,  and that’s what cluster bombs do.  So I think the message to  countries … that haven’t signed is that we believe we have  established a standard by which all countries are judged,  whether they sign the treaty or not,' he added.    For many who are already scarred by cluster bombs,  however, life remains a daily struggle.     Thirty-nine-year-old Ta Doangchom lost both his arms and  the sight in his right eye when he triggered a bombie while  foraging for food nine years ago.  'I can’t support my  family,' he said.  'All of my children had to leave school  because we were so poor.  I feel like a burden on my wife and  on my family. '   Like Ta, Phongsavath now advocates on behalf of other  survivors, urging an end to the use of the weapons that  devastated their lives.  But he is also still learning to  cope with what happened to him.    'I never saw the war with my own eyes,' Phongsavath said.   'But I now know that the bombs were dropped on my country.   And they didn’t just kill soldiers.  They killed men, women  and children. ' 