The drone war that has been anticipated in Yemen for the last  few months has been delayed by the failure of U. S.  Special  Operations Forces (SOF) to generate usable intelligence on al  Qaeda there. That failure has given the CIA a new argument for wresting  control of the drone war in Yemen from the Joint Special  Operations Command (JSOC) which now controls the drone  assets in the country.  But some key administration officials  are resisting a CIA takeover of the war in Yemen, as  reported by the Washington Post Nov.  7. The struggle between the CIA's operations directorate and  SOF officials over management of a drone war in Yemen has  been a driving force in pushing the war against al Qaeda and  affiliated organisations into many more countries — along  with President Barack Obama's eagerness to show that he is  doing more than his predecessor on terrorism.  Both the CIA covert operations directorate and SOF brass  regard the outcome in Yemen as the key to the larger  struggle over control of a series of covert wars that the  Obama administration approved in principle last year. The CIA directorate and the two major figures in the Iraq- Afghanistan wars, Gen.  David Petraeus and Gen.  Stanley A.   McChrystal, lobbied Obama in 2009 to expand covert  operations against al Qaeda to a dozen countries in the  Middle East, the Horn of Africa and Central Asia. In spring 2009, McChrystal, then director of operations for  the Joint Chiefs of Staff, persuaded the White House to give  U. S.  combatant commanders wider latitude to carry out covert  military operations against al Qaeda or other organisations  deemed to be terrorists, according to a May 25 report by  Marc Ambinder of The Atlantic.  Based on the Obama decision, on Sep.  30, 2009, Petraeus  issued an order creating a Joint Unconventional Warfare Task  Force to plan and execute covert intelligence gathering in  support of later covert military operations throughout the  CENTCOM area.  The Petraeus order was followed within weeks by an influx of  surveillance equipment and as many as 100 SOF trainers, as  well as additional CIA personnel in Yemen, according to the  Post Nov.  7 report.  With the support of McChrystal and Petraeus, who was then  still CENTCOM chief, JSOC was given control of the covert  operation in Yemen. But JSOC stumbled badly and failed to generate usable  intelligence on al Qaeda targets, as the Post reported Nov.   7.  On Dec.  17, less than three months after the Petraeus order,  a cruise missile was launched against what was supposed to  have been an al Qaeda training camp in Abyan province in  south Yemen. But the strike, which was supposed to have been attributed  to Yemen's tiny air force, was based on faulty intelligence.   The Yemeni parliament found that it had killed 41 members of  two families, including 17 women and 23 children.  It was  known almost immediately to have been a U. S.  strike. By all accounts, it was major political gift to AQAP, which  has its sights set on toppling the government of President  Ali Abdullah Saleh.  AQAP seized on videos of the carnage to  step up its attack on Saleh as a U. S.  stooge. Al Qaeda has also been able to justify targeting the United  States as revenge for the Dec.  17 attack.  In June and July,  the AQAP announced that it was planning a 'catastrophe for  the enemies of God' in response to the Abyan attack,  according to Gregory Johnsen, a Princeton doctoral candidate  who has done research in Yemen. That may have been a reference to the two parcels from Yemen  to an address in Chicago intercepted Oct.  29, one of which  was discovered to have 'explosive material'.  On May 27, another cruise missile strike killed a popular  deputy province chief who was apparently mediating between  the Yemeni government and al Qaeda officials.  Local  tribesmen retaliated by attacking an oil pipeline in the  vicinity. After that strike, the CIA went on the offensive to get the  administration to take control of the drones away from the  SOF.  A series of articles in the New York Times, the Wall  Street Journal and the Associated Press in mid- to late  August cited unnamed officials referring to the possibility  of CIA drone operations in Yemen.  Col.  Pat Lang, a former Defense Intelligence Officer for the  Middle East with operational experience in Yemen, told IPS  the CIA had benefitted from JSOC stumbling. 'The agency has taken advantage of every criticism of the  performance of the SOF as an argument to regain control over  cover operations,' said Lang.  'The competition between the military clandestine services  and the CIA is greater than ever before,' Lang told IPS.  But according to U. S.  officials quoted in Sunday's Post,  ever since the errant late May strike, U. S.  drones have been  present in the skies over Yemen searching for AQAP targets.   The Post reported that the drones are still under the  control of JSOC, operating under the overall command of the  chief of the Central Command.  The Post article quoted a 'senior Obama administration  official' as hinting strongly that the CIA's operations  branch is lobbying the White House hard for control over the  drones in Yemen but not convincing some key officials. 'There are a lot of people who are really feeling good about  what they're doing in certain parts of the world,' said the  official.  That was an apparent reference to the drone war in  Pakistan, which is run by the CIA's operations directorate.  'But that doesn't mean that, oh, if you'll just let us do  this over here, you're going to have a different picture or  different results' than the past in Yemen, the official  said, clearly referring to the lack of actionable  intelligence.  The report suggests that key officials now realise that  neither JSOC nor the CIA is going to be able to obtain  actionable intelligence on al Qaeda under present  circumstances.  Former DIA intelligence officer Lang agrees.  He believes the  Yemeni Intelligence Service, which is a 'very effective  secret police force' with 'considerable penetration  capability', is not fully sharing the intelligence it has on  al Qaeda with U. S.  officials.  'I'm sure Saleh is concerned about AQAP,' Lang said, 'but he  can't allow himself to be seen as serving the United  States. ' And Saleh may figure that AQAP has penetrated his  intelligence service as well, according to Lang. For the time being, it appears the drone war in Yemen is  abeyance.  But powerful bureaucratic forces will be  continuing to make the case that they can justify the  beginning of drone strikes there. AQAP leaders are hoping to see the U. S.  use more military  force in Yemen, according to Johnsen.  'They would like  nothing better than for the U. S.  to invade Yemen,' Johnsen  told IPS.  'The more they can show active U. S.  intervention,  the better it is for them. '*Gareth Porter is an investigative historian and journalist  specialising in U. S.  national security policy.  The paperback  edition of his latest book, 'Perils of Dominance: Imbalance  of Power and the Road to War in Vietnam', was published in  2006. 