The administration of President Barack Obama should begin  shifting to a counterterrorism (CT) strategy requiring many  fewer troops in Afghanistan if its pending review finds that  the current counterinsurgency (COIN) strategy is not working,  according to a new report by a bipartisan task force of 25  prominent analysts and former top foreign policy officials. The report, released here Friday by the influential Council  on Foreign Relations (CFR), concluded that Obama should, in  any event, stick to his plans to begin withdrawing the  approximately 100,000 U. S.  troops currently deployed to  Afghanistan in July 2011 despite growing pressure from the  Pentagon and Republicans to put off the date. The 92-page 'U. S.  Strategy for Pakistan and Afghanistan'  also concluded that Pakistan's efforts in cracking down  against terrorist groups that threaten Afghanistan, India,  and the United States 'have so far been lacking' and warned  that military aid could be cut off if Islamabad continues to  'nurture or harbour these groups'.  Islamabad has denied sheltering, let alone supporting, such  groups. 'The United States still needs to seek a shift in Pakistani  strategic calculations about the use of militancy as a  foreign policy tool,' according to the task force, which was  co-chaired by George W.  Bush's deputy secretary of state,  Richard Armitage, and Bill Clinton's national security  adviser, Sandy Berger. 'Washington should continue to make clear to Islamabad that  at a basic level, U. S.  partnership and assistance depend  upon action against LeT (Lashkar-e-Taiba), the Afghan  Taliban, especially the Haqqani network, and relative  international terror groups,' according to the report. It also called for Washington to maintain its 1. 5-billion- dollar-a-year non-military aid programme, particularly in  light of last summer's disastrous flooding; offer  preferential market access for Pakistani textiles; and  encourage improvement in relations between Pakistan and  India. The report, which will likely receive considerable attention  here given the prominence of the task force members, comes  just as the White House is gathering data for a formal  review of the ambitious COIN strategy Obama announced last  December and that has increased the number of U. S. , NATO and  other coalition soldiers in Afghanistan to more than  140,000. The review is designed to assess 'how this current approach  is working' according to broad range of military and  political criteria, according to a senior White House  official who briefed reporters by telephone earlier this  week.  The official added, however, that it will not consider  alternatives or recommend changes in the basic approach. In the run-up to the review and next week's key NATO summit  in Lisbon, where Obama is expected to gather commitments  from U. S.  allies to maintain forces in Afghanistan until at  least 2014, the U. S.  commander there, Gen.  David Petraeus,  and his subordinates have claimed that they are making  significant progress against the Taliban, especially in the  insurgents' traditional stronghold in and around Kandahar. They and other senior U. S.  officials have also reported that  some Taliban leaders, allegedly as a result of the increased  military pressure that includes cross-border drone attacks  in Pakistan, have responded more favourably to offers by  President Hamid Karzai to enter into peace talks. Critics have cast doubt on both claims, however, suggesting  that they are designed to persuade an increasingly sceptical  public, NATO allies, and the White House itself that the  COIN strategy is indeed working and should be given more  time — well beyond July 2011 — to achieve its mission. The CFR task force noted that there were indeed 'hopeful  signs of progress', such as the acceleration in the  recruitment and training of Afghan security forces and the  targeting of Taliban networks.  However, in other areas,  notably in improving governance, fighting corruption and,  and promoting reconciliation, 'trends are less encouraging'. Armitage told reporters that he thought the recent claims  about Taliban contacts with the government regarding peace  talks 'don't amount to much' and were more likely 'an  attempt …to try to sow some discontent within Taliban  ranks. ''The cloudy picture and high costs (of the current strategy)  raise the question of whether the United States should now  downsize its ambitions and reduce its military presence in  Afghanistan,' the report said.  It added that such a change  carried 'significant risks', including the consolidation of  Taliban control over important parts of the country and  possibly wider ethnic and regional conflicts. 'That said, the current U. S.  approach is at a critical  point,' it went on, arguing that the pending review 'should  mark the start of a clear-eyed assessment of whether there  is sufficient overall progress to conclude that the strategy  is working. 'If the review concluded that the strategy is indeed working,  'then that should enable the United States to steadily draw  down its forces starting in July, based on conditions on the  ground, as the president has announced. ' 'If not, however, a more significant drawdown to a narrower  military mission would be warranted,' it said, suggesting  the adoption of a CT strategy that would require as few as  10,000-20,000 troops 'led by Special Operations Forces armed  with cash, weapons, surveillance, and the ability to call in  U. S.  airpower…'Those recommendations drew a sharp dissent by eight members  of the task force, including a former commander of U. S.   forces in Afghanistan, Gen.  David Barno; an architect of the  Iraq 'surge' Gen.  John Keane (ret. ); a former director of  national intelligence, John Negroponte; the chief U. S.   diplomat behind the creation of the Karzai government in  2001-2, James Dobbins; and the head of the influential  Center for a New American Security (CNAS), John Nagl, who  reportedly is in line to become the next assistant secretary  of defence for Special Operations and Low Intensity  Conflict. 'While lack of progress by July 2011 should rightfully be  seen as a dangerous indicator the most logical response is  to reassess the strategy — not to reflexively end it and  move to large-scale withdrawal,' they complained, adding  that such a move would 'preemptively tie the president's  hands'. The majority position, however, was hailed by some of the  three dozen policy analysts, academics, and former senior  officials who made up the 'Afghan Study Group', a joint  project of the New America Foundation (NAF) and the Center  for International Policy.  That group called for early adoption of a CT strategy that  would accelerate the withdrawal of U. S.  troops, arguing that  '(w)aging a lengthy counterinsurgency war in Afghanistan may  well do more to aid Taliban recruiting than to dismantle the  group, help spread conflict further into Pakistan, unify  radical groups that might otherwise be quarrelling amongst  themselves, threaten the long-term health of the U. S.   economy, and prevent the U. S.  government from turning its  full attention to other pressing problems. ''Their recommendations are an important step in the  direction of a smarter strategy,' said Steve Clemons, the  director of NAF's American Strategy Program, speaking of the  CFR report.  'It provides the president more political cover  if he decides to make the shift. ''They're basically saying the same thing we've been saying,'  said Matthew Hoh, the Study Group's director.  'They're very  concerned about the costs of the war, as are we, and, like  us, they're very strong on the need for a real national  reconciliation process, for constitutional reform, and other  political initiatives to end the conflict. '*Jim Lobe's blog on U. S.  foreign policy can be read at  http://www. lobelog. com. 