A special envoy from President Barack Obama raised the  possibility in a secret meeting with senior Iraqi military and  civilian officials in Baghdad Sep.  23 that his administration  would leave more than 15,000 combat troops in Iraq after the  2011 deadline for U. S.  withdrawal, according to a senior Iraqi  intelligence official familiar with the details of the  meeting. But the White House official, Puneet Talwar, special  assistant to the president and senior director for the Gulf  States, Iran and Iraq on the National Security Council (NSC)  staff, said the deployment would have to be handled in a way  that was consistent the president's pledge to withdraw U. S.   troops completely from Iraq under the 2008 agreement, the  official said.  Talwar suggested that the combat troops could be placed  under the cover of the State Department's security force,  the Iraqi intelligence official told IPS.  The Obama envoy was referring to a force that the State  Department had announced in August to provide security for  U. S.  civilian officials working in Baghdad and four regional  consulates in Kirkuk, Erbil, Mosul and Basra.  The  administration's official position is that the security  force is to be manned by private security personnel, as  explained in a briefing given by Deputy Assistant Secretary  of State Michael Corbin Aug.  17. Talwar's remarks suggest the Obama administration was  planning to adopt a ruse to keep combat troops in Iraq after  the expiration of the U. S. -Iraq troop withdrawal agreement  on Dec.  31, 2011, while assuring the U. S.  public that all  U. S.  troops had been pulled out by the deadline.  Last year, Obama accepted a proposal by U. S.  military  leaders to re-label all combat brigades in Iraq 'advise and  assist brigades' so he could claim that he was withdrawing  all combat troops by Aug.  31, 2010.  Six U. S.  fully equipped  combat brigades remain in Iraq today, contrary to the  administration's official position that only non-combat  troops remain there.  Asked by the Iraqis whether there would be U. S.  troops in  Iraq in spring 2012, Talwar responded that it would 'depend  on the definition of a troop', according to the account of  the meeting provided to IPS by the Iraqi intelligence  official. When the Iraqi participants in the Sep.  23 meeting asked how  many troops might be left in Iraq, Talwar said preferably  one brigade but that it could be two brigades.  When asked  how many soldiers that would mean per brigade, however, the  NSC official said the number could be open-ended.  An Iraqi military official told Talwar the military  understood the minimum number of troops needed for a self- contained U. S.  combat force was 15,000 to 28,000.  They asked  Talwar whether the U. S.  could keep at least 15,000 in the  country, and Talwar answered that it was possible.  Each U. S.  combat brigade team has 3,500 to 4,000 troops.    Thus the 15,000 regular combat troops discussed as a  possible post-2011 troop presence would represent between  three and four brigades.  The Iraqis also asked whether the 15,000 regular combat  troops could be augmented with Special Operations Forces,  according to the Iraqi official's account.  Talwar said the  additional deployment of SOF troops after the withdrawal  deadline would be possible, because the United States had  never publicly acknowledged the presence of SOF units in  Iraq.   The Pentagon signaled last summer that it was assuming the  post-2011 U. S.  military presence in Iraq would be less than  20,000 troops.  In a press briefing last August, Deputy  Assistant Secretary of Defense for Middle East Colin Kahl  said Iraq 'is not going to need tens of thousands of  [American] forces'.  Talwar also told the Iraqis that any deployment of combat  troops in Iraq beyond the termination date of the U. S. -Iraqi  agreement would require a letter from Prime Minister Nuri  al-Maliki.  The Iraqi officials said the letter would be  sent.   A National Security Council official refused to comment on  whether Talwar had traveled to Baghdad at the time of the  reported meeting. To persuade the Obama administration to be more forthcoming  on the issue of a continued U. S.  troop presence, the Iraqi  military has portrayed the government as threatened by both  domestic and foreign enemies, according to the official’s  account of those interactions.  The Iraqis have argued that Iraq must have allies in the  immediate future, and that if the United States does not  fulfill that role, Iraq will turn to Iran or Russia to fill  the gap, according to the Iraqi official.   They have told U. S.  officials that Iran has already offered  to station troops in Iraq if they are needed, the official  said.  The main threat to Iraq's stability and integrity comes from  the unresolved political conflicts between Sunni and Shi'a  political factions and between the Kurds and Arabs.  The Obama administration used all of its waning political  influence to pressure Maliki to include former Prime  Minister Iyad Allawi and his Sunni-supported Iraqiya bloc in  the government that must still be formed. But Maliki is said to be insisting that the 'National  Council' which the tentative agreement allocates to Allawi  would be subordinate to the Maliki government — much to  Allawi's chagrin.  On Saturday, Allawi said he and his  followers in Iraqiya would not join the government and  predicted an upsurge of violence.  Allawi appeared to be hinting that Sunni fighters who left  the insurgency in 2006 and 2007 under deals made with the  U. S.  military will now resume military resistance to the  government.  The fundamental conflict between Iraqi Kurds and Arabs over  the fate of Kirkuk and the oil fields in the surrounding  area may be an even greater threat.  The Kurds are insisting  on a census that would presumably bolster their claim that  Kirkuk is a predominantly Kurdish city in advance of a  referendum on the issue.  But Maliki has been pursuing a domestic political strategy  based on assuming the role of Arab nationalist, which makes  it very unlikely that he will accept any concession of Iraqi  territory — especially territory with major oil resources —  to the Kurds.  The Iraqi military expects war between Kurdish troops and  the Iraqi army over the disputed territory in the north to  erupt sometime in the next two years.  But the Iraqi army has  been telling its U. S.  counterparts that it will not be ready  to handle such a crisis until 2014, according to the Iraqi  intelligence official.  Elements of the U. S.  4th Infantry Division are now deployed  in northern Iraq along the line of conflict between Kurds  and Arabs, and the U. S.  military has been particularly eager  to preserve that U. S.  military presence there.  Last March,  Gen.  Ray Odierno, the former top U. S.  commander in Iraq,  raised the possibility of putting U. S.  troops along that  line under a United Nations peacekeeping mandate.  A U. S.  decision to keep combat brigades in Iraq would  encourage Maliki to continue take a hard line toward Kurdish  aspirations in pursuit of his strategy for consolidating  power.  It would also bolster his refusal to allow Allawi to  gain a share of political power. And negotiating a new agreement to station U. S.  combat  brigades in Iraq would risk embroiling the United States in  Iraq's violent ethnic and sectarian conflicts for decades to  come.  *Gareth Porter is an investigative historian and journalist  specialising in U. S.  national security policy.  The paperback  edition of his latest book, 'Perils of Dominance: Imbalance  of Power and the Road to War in Vietnam', was published in  2006. 