Thorny territorial disputes with neighbours China and Russia  appear to nudging Japan’s pacifist public toward accepting  what has so far been an unpalatable prospect: a more assertive  and militarily strong country.    Almost 80 percent of those polled in a survey released on  Nov.  8 by Japan’s NHK public television showed growing  frustration with their socialist-leaning Prime Minister  Naoto Kan over his handling of tensions over territorial  rows.  Many pointed to his 'weak' diplomacy as the second  most important reason, after the stagnating economy, for  their disappointment in him.    'Japan’s hands are tied when it comes to rapping China  and Russia over the territorial disputes,' Hisashi Manabu, a  62-year-old company employee said, referring to the post-war  Constitution that prohibits Japan from rebuilding its  military after its World War II defeat.  'The stark reality  is that we must be responsible for our own protection. '   The current round of tensions with China stems from  Japan’s detention of a Chinese captain on Sep.  7 after he  rammed his fishing boat against a Japanese Naval Coast Guard  ship.  It had ordered him off the Senkaku islands, which  China calls the ‘Diaoyutai’.  The skipper was later released  after strong protests by Beijing, which also claims  ownership of the islands.      In many ways, China’s growing influence in Asia, not to  mention its becoming the world’s second biggest economy this  year, has led to a new awareness in Japan of its own  vulnerability, analysts say.    This is despite the security umbrella provided by the  1965 Japan-U. S.  Security Pact, which obliges the United  States to come to Japan’s defence in case of military  attack.     Understandably, Japan is happy to see the U. S.  government  engaging more deeply in Asia, reflected in U. S.  President  Barack Obama’s 10-day tour of the region in November.   Meeting with Kan in November, he called the U. S.   relationship with Japan the 'cornerstone' of U. S.  engagement  in the Asia-Pacific.    'Nationalism is getting stronger on both sides.  The  territorial clash with China has revealed how little Tokyo  is prepared to deal with the crisis both in military and  diplomatic terms,' explained Prof Takashi Inoguchi,  international relations expert at Niigata prefectural  university.    For now, more time is needed to let the testy ties  between China and Japan, whose historical relationship is  already marred by Japan’s colonisation of parts of China  decades ago, calm down.  Indeed, Chief Cabinet Secretary  Yoshito Sengaku told the press that Japan-China ties are  important but 'need time' to be repaired, as both countries  have to be sensitive to their domestic constituencies.    For example, thousands of Japanese shouted anti-Chinese  slogans against Chinese President Hu Jintao when he was in  Yokohama for the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC)  summit on Nov.  13.  During the past month, Chinese groups  have also held anti-Japan demonstrations in several cities  in China.    Japanese diplomacy has also been facing a severe test on  the Russian front after President Dmitry Medvedev ignored a  warning from the Japanese government, and on Nov.  1 visited  Kunashiri island, which is among the four islands that two  countries claim.  Japan calls them the Northern Territories  and Russia, the Southern Kurils.    Medvedev declared on Kunashiri that the island, which is  under Russian administration, belongs to Russia, touching a  sensitive chord among Japanese who point angrily to the then  Soviet Union’s invasion of the islands four days after  Japan’s surrender on Aug.  15, 1945.  Medvedev was the first  Russian president to visit the island, and this row has  prevented Japan and Russia from signing a formal peace  treaty after World War II.    These open challenges that China and Russia threw at  Japan have pushed Tokyo to step up moves to court the United  States, an approach that is quite a departure from earlier  pronouncements by Kan’s socialist-leaning government.  When  it took office in June 2010, it promised to align Japan  closer with its Asian neighbours.    Likewise, Japan’s leading daily, the ‘Yomiuri’, reported  that the Defence Ministry plans to beef up the country’s  military, called the Self Defence Forces, by sending a new  unit to the Yonekuni island, which lies in close proximity  to the Senkaku islands.    The unit will monitor via radar the movements of Chinese  warships that have increasingly been active in the East  China Sea, defence ministry officials say.    Japan has also been busy investing in its security by  cultivating ties with neighbours ranging from South Korea to  India, another China rival.    Tokyo has started negotiations with Seoul on mutual  exchanges of classified military information — an  unprecedented initiative that defies the countries’ troubled  past, which has roots in Japan’s colonisation of the Korean  peninsula.  Sharing military information, however, is a  common interest to keep watch over Stalinist North Korea’s  nuclear programme.    On Oct.  25, Japan and India signed an Economic  Partnership Agreement that aims to foster enhanced economic  relations within the next 10 years.  A 'timely and strategic  move to contain China’s maritime expansion in the East China  Sea' was how the ‘Yomiuri’ newspaper called this  development.    'The new thrust by Japan takes place against a historic  shift in power in East Asia with the rise of China’s  influence,' said Prof Yuichi Hosoya, who specialises in  international politics at Keio University.     But he expresses the hope that these diplomatic  maneuverings, which will continue as Asia reacts to China’s  clout, would lead to a more balanced power configuration,  and not more instability, in the region.  Said Hoyosa: 'A  stronger Japan supporting the United States must become not  a threat to Beijing, but rather produce a balance of power  in Asia that will be welcomed by all. '  