With pressure to slash the 1. 3 trillion-dollar federal deficit  rising sharply, the public debate over whether to exempt the  Pentagon from such cuts is moving rapidly toward centre-stage. Two major bipartisan reports — including one commissioned by  President Barack Obama -- released over the past 10 days  argued against such an exemption. But powerful Republicans, whose party win control of the  House of Representatives and boosted their influence in the  Senate in the mid-term elections earlier this month, seem  determined to oppose any cuts to the U. S.  military. But a big unknown is what will be the attitude of the  several dozen Republicans identified with the 'Tea Party'  movement who will take their seats in the new Congress in  January.  While some, notably former Republican vice- presidential candidate Sarah Palin, actually favour more  spending on the military, others, led by Kentucky Senator- elect Rand Paul, have insisted that defence cuts must be on  the table. Whether these new deficit hawks will form an alliance with  liberal Democrats — whose influence has actually increased  within the party's Congressional caucus due to the defeat of  many pro-defence conservative Democratic incumbents — to  force cuts in military spending promises to be one of the  more-interesting questions that will play out over the  coming year. In the current year, the Pentagon's budget stands at more  than 530 billion dollars, not counting an additional 182  billion dollars it has been spending on the wars in  Afghanistan, Iraq, and other overseas counter-terror  operations.  Altogether, the U. S.  military budget makes up  more than 40 percent of total global military spending and  roughly five times more than the country with next biggest  budget, China. Indeed, largely as a result of the Bush administration's  'global war on terror,' the military budget has almost  doubled over the past decade.  It now constitutes 55 percent  of the government's discretionary spending — spending that  is not a legal obligation, such as Social Security, or  Medicare -- and nearly 25 percent of the entire federal  budget. That makes it a tempting target for the deficit hawks. Anticipating the coming battle, Defence Secretary Robert  Gates tried to pre-empt the debate when he announced a plan  to cut as much as $100 billion over the next five years from  the Pentagon's budget by reforming procurement procedures,  reducing the Department's reliance on private contractors,  and other measures to reduce waste and inefficiencies.  But  those savings would be recycled within the Pentagon whose  budget, in any event, should continue to grow at at least  one percent per year in real terms. 'My greatest fear is that in economic tough times people  will see the defence budget as the place to solve the  nation's deficit problems…,' he told reporters in August.  He  said it would be 'disastrous (to) slash it in an effort to  find some kind of dividend to the put money someplace else. 'In October, however, 56 House Democrats, led by Financial  Services Committee Chairman Barney Frank, and one veteran  Republican, Texas Rep.  Ron Paul (Rand Paul's father),  published a letter to the bipartisan National Commission on  Fiscal Responsibility and Reform — a group of greybeards  convened by the White House to make recommendations for  cutting the federal deficit — urging that it recommend real  cuts in the Pentagon's budget. As co-chairs of the 'Sustainable Defense Task Force,' the  two men have argued that Washington should cut one trillion  dollars from the projected defence budgets over the next  decade primarily by quickly winding down the wars in Iraq  and Afghanistan, closing down some of the more than 700  military bases Washington has spread around the globe, and  eliminating expensive weapons systems of questionable  utility. Sensing trouble, three defence contractor-backed think tanks  — the neo-conservative American Enterprise Institute and the  Foreign Policy Initiative and the far-right Heritage  Foundation — published a joint report entitled 'Defending  Defense' heralded by full-page ads in major newspapers. 'The defense budget is a relatively small slice of the 14- plus trillion dollar American pie,' they claimed in a  reference to total US gross domestic product (GDP).  'And  it's a shrinking slice,' the report insisted, noting that  the Pentagon's budget was set to fall from 4. 9 percent of  GDP to 3. 6 percent of GDP by 2015, 'even though the nation  has assigned more missions to the military over the past two  decades. 'When, however, the National Commission, which was co-chaired  by Bill Clinton's former chief of staff, Erskine Bowles, and  former Republican Sen.  Alan Simpson, came out with its  initial report Nov.  10, it called for defence cuts of as  much as 100 billion dollars by 2015 as part of a package of  proposed spending reductions covering the entire federal  budget.  It specifically urged canceling several key weapons  systems, notably the V-35 fighter jet, the tilt-rotor V-22  Osprey, and two kinds of actual and planned combat vehicles,  among other cuts. The recommendations were immediately denounced by the  Republican leadership, including the likely chairman of the  powerful House Armed Services Committee, California Rep.   Howard 'Buck' McKeon, who warned that the country could not  afford 'cutting defence in the midst of two wars. ' Gates  criticised the proposal as 'math, not strategy. 'At the same time, however, some Republicans, notably the two  Pauls, Oklahoma Sen.  Tom Coburn and other deficit hawks in  the party, welcomed the report, arguing that it would help  create space for a much-needed intra-party debate. On Wednesday this week, another group convened by the  Bipartisan Policy Center (BPC) released a second set of  recommendations for reducing the federal deficit. Co-chaired by former Sen.  Pete Domenici, who served as  chairman of the Senate Budget Committee in the 1990's and  early 2000's, and Clinton's former budget director, Alice  Rivlin, the group, which included former governors, local  government officials, union and business leaders and  Congressional staff, called for a five-year freeze on  defence spending at current levels with a possible savings  of some 430 billion dollars over that period and 1. 1  trillion dollars by 2020. Echoing the National Commission's report, it called for  canceling the same weapons systems and also urged reducing  the number of soldiers and marines by 275,000 — or about ten  percent off total active-duty personnel and reservists — as  current wars wind down. After its publication, some 46 leading national-security  analysts and retired senior policy-makers, including  intelligence and military officers, released their own  letter to the National Commission echoing the call for sharp  cuts. 'We can achieve safe savings in defense if we are willing to  rethink how we produce military power and how, why, and  where we put it to use,' the letter, which was sponsored by  the Coalition for a Realistic Foreign Policy and the Boston- based Project for Defense Alternatives. 'The wars in Iraq and Afghanistan have revealed the limits  of military power,' it said, noting that the military needed  to 'prune' some of the missions, such as 'regime change and  'nation-building,' that it had taken on since the end of the  Cold War and 'restore an emphasis on defense and  deterrence. ''(F)iscal realities call on us to strike a new balance  between investing in military power and attending to the  fundamentals of national strength on which our true power  rests,' the letter asserted. Briefing reporters about the letter, Gordon Adams, who  served as the top national-security official in Clinton's  budget office, said that events of the past few weeks were  having a 'snowball' effect on the national debate on deficit  reduction. 'Despite the effort by Secretary Gates to protect real  growth in the defence budget, it is simply not going to be  viable either economically or politically to exempt the  Department of Defense from the budget discipline that's  coming,' said Adams, who is currently based at the Stimson  Center. *Jim Lobe's blog on U. S.  foreign policy can be read at  http://www. lobelog. com. 