A review of modern human history finds no shortage of  instances where hate speech has fuelled genocidal rampages  against minority ethnic groups. One of the most prominent is the case of Radio Télévision  Libre des Mille Collines (RTLM), a Rwandan radio station  that broadcast from Jul.  8, 1993 to Jul.  31, 1994.  It is  regarded as having played a crucial role during the April- July 1994 Rwandan genocide, spreading racist propaganda  primarily against Tutsis and moderate Hutus. A November 2009 study by David Yanagizawa of the Institute  for International Economic Studies at Stockholm University  estimated that the RTLM broadcasts explained an increase in  violence amounting to 45,000 Tutsi deaths, about nine  percent of the total. 'Speech alone cannot bring about genocide,' explains Susan  Benesch, a human rights legal scholar who has been  commissioned by the U. N.  to develop policy guidelines on  potentially dangerous speech, but it is 'a catalyst to  spread violence. 'Propaganda experts also point to the Armenian genocide —  during and just after World War I — when the low literacy  rate in Turkey meant that most media failed to reach more  than a small number of intellectuals.  Historian Vahagan  Dadrian has stressed the importance of the sermons of Muslim  mullahs and the messages of the government spread by town  criers.  Code words such as traitors, saboteurs, spies,  conspirators and infidels were common. Between 600,000 and 1,500,000 Armenians were killed during  the genocide, with propaganda crucially fuelling interracial  hate.  Nearly a century later, the U. N.  Office of the Special  Adviser on the Prevention of Genocide has hired Benesch as  part of a groundbreaking 18-month project focused on ways to  limit the effects of inflammatory speech, while at the same  time safeguarding the right to freedom of expression. Context is important, Benesch told IPS.  'There are four main  variables - the speaker, the speech act, the audience, and  the social and historical context in which the speech is  delivered.  All four can contribute to dangerousness,' she  said. The project has three specific goals: design a blueprint for  monitoring dangerous speech in countries at risk of genocide  and mass atrocities; develop and test a methodology to gauge  the dangerousness of specific speech; and produce policy  response options. Christopher Tuckwood, executive director of the Sentinel  Project for Genocide Prevention, told IPS that international  legal norms need to be established in order to determine  when speech is dangerous enough to be justifiably restricted  by a government. However, he added, 'While it is important to guard rights  like free speech, when possible incitement to genocide is  taking place, the threat to people's lives is too high to  allow it to pass by on principle. 'It is very important to define genocide properly, as there  is a major difference between genuinely dangerous and  insulting or offensive speech, agrees Francis M.  Deng,  Special Adviser for the Prevention of Genocide. 'U. N.  capacity to analyse information on possible genocide  is fundamental.  Our task is to gather information,  particularly from within the U. N. , and there is a lot of  information that exists within the system,' Deng told IPS.  Mark Lattimer, executive director of Minority Rights Group  International, underlined the paradox that international  human rights laws on hate speech are sometimes used against  the very groups they are supposed to protect. 'In Europe, for example, they have been invoked against  black and Muslim activists, and in Iran and Rwanda such  restrictions have been used quite cynically to limit the  freedom of expression of political opponents,' Lattimer told  IPS. Tuckwood agreed.  'This is something that constantly comes up  as a legal issue in the U. S. , where free speech is  considered sacred but many individuals and groups abuse it  to promote racist, homophobic, and other discriminatory  views,' he said. 'At the opposite extreme are governments that use hate  speech themselves.  In between are those regimes which may  use the pretence of restricting hate speech to justify  censorship of the opposition,' Tuckwood said. He added that placing restrictions on incitement to genocide  is a very useful measure in preventing genocide itself,  especially since new technology like the internet and social  networking tools makes spreading hate speech and organising  mass violence even easier. Educating people about manipulative social processes and  discrediting hate speech in the eyes of the public make  inflammatory messages far less persuasive, Benesch said at a  recent U. N.  conference. 'People do not wake up one day and decide to start  massacring their neighbours,' she noted.  The more information people have access to, the less they  will be influenced by propaganda, which plays a critical  role in fuelling interethnic hate.  'Not only does [potential dangerous speech] cause the  dehumanisation of the target group, but it also motivates  the rank-and-file perpetrators to obediently carry out the  killings,' Tuckwood told IPS. 'This is why monitoring hate speech is a particularly strong  warning indicator of the threat of genocide in a situation- of-concern, to use our own terminology,' he said. Using the prevention strategy designed by Benesch, the U. N.   Office of the Special Adviser on the Prevention of Genocide  is trying to nip in the bud the creation of a social context  that could lead to genocide.  Information from the field is essential to implement this  strategy.  The U. N.  provides protection to people who could  be endangered by making useful information publicly  available, Deng told IPS. 'More and more we are finding that U. N.  agencies are quite  receptive to our requests for information, and we have  daily, weekly and monthly reports based on the information  gathered,' he said. 