When Israeli commandos killed nine mostly Turkish activists  during a raid on a flotilla of ships carrying humanitarian aid  to Palestinians last May, Turkish Prime Minister Recep Tayyip  Erdogan described the attack as a prime example of 'state  terrorism'. 'Even tyrants, bandits and pirates have their own rules of  ethics,' he said, but not terrorists killing on behalf of a  U. N.  member state. And when several internationally renowned artists, including  the rock band Pixies and British rocker Elvis Costello,  responded by cancelling scheduled concerts in Tel Aviv,  Shuki Weiss, one of Israel's leading promoters, called the  growing boycott movement 'cultural terrorism'.  'Music and politics should not mix,' he said, even as the  Palestinian Campaign for the Academic and Cultural Boycott  of Israel was picking up steam. Perhaps not surprisingly, a U. N.  Ad Hoc Committee to  Eliminate Terrorism, created by the General Assembly back in  December 1996, has remained deadlocked as it tries to reach  agreement on a comprehensive draft convention to eliminate  terrorism. Last month, it made another unsuccessful effort at drawing a  distinction between 'freedom fighters' and 'state sponsored  terrorism'. 'One knows terrorism when one sees it,' Ambassador Palitha  Kohona of Sri Lanka, a former chief of the U. N.  Treaty  Section, told IPS. The draft convention, tabled in 2001 by India, has won  agreement by several delegations to a substantial extent.   However, it is bogged down on a few crucial issues.  For  example, it has been proposed by some that state sponsored  terrorism or certain acts of states be covered by the draft,  Kohona said. Many others have resisted this proposal on the basis that  acts of states are governed by other existing rules of  international law and therefore, it was superfluous to cover  this aspect under the draft. Similarly, said Kohona, a proposal has been made to exclude  certain acts of liberation movements from the ambit of the  draft convention.  But this has also met with wide  resistance. The proposed new comprehensive convention was intended to  provide umbrella cover for situations not already addressed  by the 13 existing sectoral conventions on terrorism  concluded under the auspices of the United Nations.  Mouin Rabbani, contributing editor to the Washington-based  Middle East Report, told IPS that achieving and applying an  objective definition of terrorism is rather beside the  point. He said terrorism has become a political epithet designed to  place enemies beyond the pale as opposed to a technical term  the purpose of which is to define certain criminal acts that  violate the laws of war and for which the perpetrators can  be held accountable. 'Thus, in the Middle East, it has reached the point where  Palestinian or Arab armed activities that target Israeli  military personnel are characterised as terrorist acts,  while Israeli armed activities that deliberately target  civilians are characterised as legitimate acts of self- defence,' he said. 'We could even conclude that at least in the Middle East,  terrorism refers to the ethnicity of the perpetrator as  opposed to the perpetrator's actions,' said Rabbani.  'Thus we enter into the realm of the absurd, where campaigns  to boycott Israel or more narrowly illegal Israeli  phenomena, such as settlement products - acts that are by  definition non-violent and don't require so much as a water  pistol - are termed terrorism,' noted Rabbani. The collective punishment of the civilian population of the  Gaza Strip, an ongoing act that has cost numerous lives with  the sanction of the United States and the European Union, is  by contrast justified as a legitimate anti-terrorist  campaign, he said. Dr.  Rohan Perera, chair of the Ad Hoc Committee to Eliminate  Terrorism, told IPS the only way to reach a consensus on the  issue is to follow the path of adopting an operational or a  criminal law definition of terrorism, rather than a generic  definition. The former approach has been followed in the 13 sectoral  conventions on terrorism, and avoids the pitfalls of the  latter approach which involves excluding certain types of  conduct such as those committed by national liberation  movements (NLM). Accordingly, he said, the draft contains a criminal law  definition. 'The question of state terrorism will continue to be  governed by general principles of international law, as it  is not possible to deal with this aspect in a law  enforcement instrument, dealing with individual criminal  responsibility, based on an 'extradite or prosecute'  regime,' he said. Similarly, said Perera, acts committed in the course of  armed conflicts by NLMs will continue to be governed by  international humanitarian law. 'The negotiations started in 2000 and we were close to  agreement in 2001, in the aftermath of 9/11 (terrorist  attacks on the United States),' he said.  But since then, it  has remained stalled, with little significant progress. He said that negotiations would resume within the framework  of the U. N. 's Sixth Committee dealing with legal issues. Asked if there will ever be a new comprehensive convention  to eliminate terrorism because of the continuing deadlock,  Kohona told IPS: 'Of course, there will be a convention. 'The international community has repeatedly condemned the use  of terrorism as a tool of political expression and for any  other purpose and therefore will seek to address the gaps in  the existing international legal framework by concluding  this convention. 'It will also wish to send another unequivocal message to  those who rely on terrorist force to achieve their goals,'  he said. 