Many United Nations peacekeepers are not only failing to meet  the needs of civilians, but they are also perceived as  unresponsive once civilians convey their needs, says a new  report by Oxfam International. This topic also was the subject of debate in the Security  Council Monday, and questions remain regarding what is  actually being done, and whether it is enough. The Oxfam report, 'Engaging With Communities: The Next  Challenge for Peacekeeping', is based on field research in  communities in southern Sudan and the Democratic Republic of  Congo.  It noted that lack of communication between  peacekeepers and the communities they were mandated to  protect, along with infrastructural issues within  peacekeeping missions themselves, were among the greatest  obstacles to protecting civilians. 'Unfortunately, the perspectives of those most affected by  violence — ordinary women, men and children — are invariably  the least heard,' it said. There are currently some 124,000 personnel serving on 16  U. N.  peacekeeping missions around the world - a nine-fold  increase since 1999. The report, and especially those interviewed in it, conveys  a clear disconnect between civilians and U. N.  peacekeepers  in certain areas.  'Most of what I hear is, 'we have not been  mandated to do this'.  What are you mandated to do? Stand by  and watch?' a man from southern Sudan was quoted as saying  in the report. Kirsten Hagon, head of the New York Oxfam office, told IPS,  'While it's true that the needs are enormous in comparison  to the resources, it's also important that they  [peacekeepers] can do a lot with what they have, and that's  where political will can come in. ' But political will doesn't seem to be living up to its  potential.  In a report issued earlier this month, U. N.   Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon said, 'There has been progress  in strengthening protection on the ground,' and noted  improvements in the protection of civilians, mainly that  more humanitarian organisations were organising better  responses to their concerns.  'Nevertheless,' he wrote, 'the need for more comprehensive  and consistent action remains. ' One challenge is that  governments and non-state actors, particularly armed groups,  do not comply with international human rights law. While the feasibility of forcing armed groups to cease  fighting and using tactics that target civilians may seem  distant, the steps that must be taken to protect civilians  seem simpler.  Hagon acknowledges that peacekeepers in  certain parts of the world have made a very positive impact.  'Just to talk to the communities can have a really big  effect, and that doesn't require a lot of resources,' she  told IPS.  The Oxfam report highlighted the importance of Community  Liaison Interpreters (CLIs), people who speak languages  vital to the region and know the culture.  It said that in  several communities, CLIs had been enormously beneficial in  improving communities' ability to communicate with the U. N.   mission.  Still, the role of the CLI must be defined better by U. N.   peacekeeping missions, stated the report.  A major hindrance  was that 'CLIs appeared to speak primarily with community  leaders rather than with the community at large. ' A lack of  female CLIs also hurt the effectiveness of these cultural  and linguistic interpreters, because women's voices in the  community are not heard.  Security Council members debated Monday whether requiring  that non-state actors obey international law implies that  the actors are recognised as legitimate groups. Sri Lanka's representative said such a requirement 'poses a  political dilemma for legitimate governments fighting  terrorist groups to protect their sovereignty. ' But Uganda's  representative disagreed on the basis that regardless of  status, non-state actors such as the Lord's Resistance Army  must still be dealt with. Valerie Amos, under-secretary for humanitarian affairs and  emergency relief coordinator, said that where the U. N.  could  not encourage compliance with international law, 'The  [Security] Council must do more to enforce it. 'Although Oxfam's report did not address the issue of abuses  perpetrated by peacekeepers, it did call into question how  the Security Council and the U. N.  could best protect  civilians.  Should energy be directed at forcing state or  non-state actors to obey international law, or should they  try to improve peacekeeping operations by accomplishing  incremental but crucial steps?'Political will is required at the top, but there is a will  required at every level and with every actor,' Hagon  reiterated. 'The fact that the Security Council did engage with this  issue is a positive if somewhat small step,' she told IPS,  but reaching out to communities to determine their specific  needs is a simple yet effective step that peacekeeping  missions can take themselves. 