The revelation that the man presumed to be a high-ranking  Taliban leader who had met with top Afghan officials was an  imposter sheds new light on Gen.  David Petraeus's aggressive  propaganda about the supposed Taliban approach to the Hamid  Karzai regime. Ever since August, Petraeus had been playing up the  Taliban's supposed willingness to talk peace with Karzai as  a development that paralleled the success he had claimed in  splitting the Sunni insurgency in Iraq in 2007.  It is now clear, however, that Petraeus was deceiving  himself as well as the news media in accepting the man  claiming to be the second-ranking Taliban commander Mullah  Akhtar Mohammad Mansour as genuine, despite a number of  indications to the contrary. Petraeus's failure to heed those signals was certainly  driven by his strong desire to establish yet another  narrative emphasising his brilliance as a war strategist,  judging from his public statements prior to the revelation  of the fraud. The tale of self-deception began a few months ago when a man  claiming to be Mullah Mansour somehow persuaded U. S.   officials, including Petraeus, to help him go to Kabul to  talk with Karzai.  Mansour had been named, along with Abdul  Qayum Zakir, to replace Mullah Baradar last March after  Baradar was detained by Pakistani intelligence, according to  a Taliban spokesman quoted in Newsweek. The first warning signal that the man was an imposter was  that he gave Karzai regime officials terms for peace that  bore no resemblance to the public posture of the Taliban.  He suggested that the Taliban merely wanted to be allowed to  return safely to Afghanistan, along with promises of jobs  and the release of prisoners, according to the Times  account.  There were no demands for the complete withdrawal  of U. S.  forces or for a change to the constitutional system.  Both those demands had been fundamental to the Taliban  position, both in public statements and in communications to  ex-Taliban intermediaries between Karzai and the Taliban  leadership.  But instead of finding the sudden disinterest in bargaining  over those demands suspicious, Petraeus apparently approved  giving the man a considerable amount of money to continue  the talks, according to reports by the New York Times and  Washington Post.  That decision was evidently influenced by Petraeus's strong  desire to believe that the vast increase in targeted raids  aimed at killing or capturing suspected Taliban officials  that had begun in March had caused top Taliban officials to  give up their fundamental peace demands — and that he was  now on his way to repeating what was believed to be his  success in Iraq.  Petraeus began to hint at such a repeat performance when he  presented the supposed Taliban approach to Karzai as another  case of splitting the insurgency in his interview with Katie  Couric of CBS news Aug.  20.  Couric asked, 'So you think they'd be receptive to  reconciliation?' to which Petraeus replied, 'Some.  Again, I  don't there's an expectation that [Taliban spiritual leader]  Mullah Omar is going to charter a plane any time soon to sit  down and discuss the Taliban laying down weapons en masse.   However, there are certainly leaders out there who we  believe are willing to do that. 'In fact, the imposter had said nothing to indicate to U. S.   and Afghan officials that he was not speaking on behalf of  the entire Quetta Shura, including Mullah Omar himself,  according to one U. S.  official familiar with the episode.   The official, who insisted on anonymity, told IPS the hope  was that the man presumed to be Mansour was authorised by  the leadership to speak for them. Nevertheless, Petraeus returned to the same theme in late  September, hinting at a divided Taliban leadership and again  drew a parallel between peace talks in Afghanistan and what  happened in Iraq.  'There are some high-level Taliban leaders who have sought  to reach out to the highest levels of the Afghan government,  and they have done that,' Petraeus told reporters on Sep.   27. The United States supported Karzai's conditions for the  talks, he said, likening them to U. S.  support for similar  conditions for negotiations with Sunnis in Iraq.  Then he  added, 'This is the way you end insurgencies. ' The New York Times reported that senior U. S.  officials,  including Petraeus himself, were saying in October that 'the  talks indicated that Taliban leaders, whose rank-and-file  fighters are under extraordinary pressure from the American- led offensive, were at least willing to discuss an end to  the war. 'Through the late summer and early autumn, Petraeus was  continuing to ignore other warning signals that the Taliban  willingness to give up the demand for U. S.  withdrawal was  too good to be true.  But throughout the entire period of U. S.  and Afghan contacts  with the imposter, the Taliban leadership was firmly denying  that they were negotiating with the Afghan government.   During the three-day Muslim holiday that began Sep.  9,  Mullah Omar had said the Taliban would 'never accept' the  current government. On Sep.  29, Taliban spokesman Zabiullah Majahid said  Petraeus's claim that the Taliban were negotiating with the  Afghan government was 'completely baseless', and that the  Taliban would not negotiate with 'foreign invaders or their  puppet government'. Even more important, Taliban officials were telling  Pakistani intelligence officers seeking clarification on the  Taliban position on peace over the summer that the U. S.  and  NATO forces would have to be withdrawn before any settlement  with Karzai, as reported by Syed Saleem Shahzad in the Asia  Times.  But Petraeus evidently believed that he was now in a  position to be able to repeat in Afghanistan the strategy  that had worked in Iraq.  He had talked about negotiations with a segment of the  Taliban leadership as the key to reducing the insurgency in  Afghanistan even before he had taken over as chief of  CENTCOM in October 2008.  At a talk at the Heritage  Foundation Oct.  8, 2008, Petraeus had said the key in  Afghanistan was negotiations with those insurgents willing  to reconcile while isolating the irreconcilables. Petraeus has been able to reap the political benefit from  the fact that most journalists and the U. S.  political elite  believe that it was Petraeus's maneuvering, combined with  the surge, that produced the Sunni turn towards cooperation  against al Qaeda.  That narrative of Petraeus-driven success is largely  mythical, however.  In fact, the Sunni shift toward joining  local anti-al Qaeda militia units was already well underway  before Petraeus took command in February 2007. When Petraeus's U. S. -NATO command, the International  Security Assistance Force (ISAF), finally consulted someone  who had actually known Mullah Mansour in late October or  early November, they were told the man they had been dealing  with was an imposter. Neither ISAF nor the Karzai government, however, have been  able establish the identity of the imposter.  *Gareth Porter is an investigative historian and journalist  specialising in U. S.  national security policy.  The paperback  edition of his latest book, 'Perils of Dominance: Imbalance  of Power and the Road to War in Vietnam', was published in  2006. 