For two decades, women around the world have marked 'Sixteen  Days of Activism Against Gender Violence', which fall between  the International Day Against Violence Against Women on Nov.   25 and International Human Rights Day on Dec.  10. From Argentina to Ghana, and Japan to Georgia, this year,  women's groups worldwide are focusing on the linkages  between militarism and violence against women. For example, the incidence of rape in conflict areas has  only increased in the past few decades, from 200,000 rapes  in Rwanda in the early 1990s to over 250,000 in the  Democratic Republic of Congo since 2003.  According to the  United Nations Development Fund for Women (UNIFEM), one out  of three women has been raped, coerced into sex, beaten, or  otherwise abused in her lifetime. IPS correspondent Cléo Fatoorehchi spoke with the executive  director of the Centre for Women's Global Leadership (CWGL),  Radhika Balakrishnan, who is also a gender and women's  studies professor at Rutgers University in the United  States. Q: Regarding civilian women raped by armed forces, do you  think that increasing the number of women in armed forces  could have a positive impact?  A: I think stopping rape is to stop the violence that the  military is based in.  So many of the women in the military  have also been raped, so our advocating for increasing the  number of women in the military might actually increase the  number of women being raped.  I think [the important thing]  is to have a real education campaign amongst the men in the  military about the impact of violence and the militaristic  culture. Q: Nevertheless, many argue that more women in peacekeeping  and armed forces is the best solution.   A: No, I don't think it would be.  I think we should have  more women in peacekeeping, that is not a bad idea, but I  don't think having women there is going to stop violence.   Actually, it depends on what kind of power they have, what  kind of role they have, what the reason is for being there.   If the reason for being there is to work with women's  organisations, to try to make sure that there is attention  brought to this, yes, but just having de facto women there  doesn't mean it is going to change. And I think there needs to be a reconstructive effort to do  education on the impact of militarism on violence, and to  talk to peacekeeping forces and educate them on what it  means to be there, and also so they can expose the level of  violence against women.  One of the things our campaign is  trying to do is to really bring attention to how much  violence actually takes place.  And very few people actually  talk about it.  Q: When you speak about education, what structures do you  refer to?  A: I think everywhere.  One of the problems with militarism  is that it is a violent culture that is perpetuated, so we  need to oppose militarism in the first place, because it is  that culture that creates violence, but we also need to  really bring much more attention to the issues of violence.   I think it has to be in the school system, I think we need  to really bring it out at a very local level.  Q: What do you think about quota systems, both in the  economic and political spheres?  A: In India, there is a policy system in Parliament.  On one  level it works, but on the other level, it depends on how  trained women are to participate politically, and not just  sort of bring women for the sake of having more numbers.  But  there is a lot of education, training and empowerment, so  that they can hold those political places, and have a voice  and power, so that they can reinforce policies. Just because women are in politics doesn't mean that they  are going to do the right thing, they have to be the right  women in politics, with the right ideas or education on  where to go. Q: What do you expect from the 55th session of the  Commission on the Status of Women, taking place next  February?  A: It is hard to say.  The focus is on science, technology  and education, and we are going to be very involved.  One of  the issues that we are looking at is the new agency, U. N.   Women, and trying to really talk to that agency and  influence what kind of issues they are going to work on.  We  want them to have a very strong part of U. N.  Women to look  at economic policy overall, and so that's one of the things  we are going to be advocating for this session.  It is not just women being economically independent, but for  women to be able to talk about economic policy.  Not  individual women, but that we can talk about macro policy,  monetary and fiscal policy, the IMF [International Monetary  Fund], we can talk about all the current international  economic policies, which women are often left out of. 