Yemen is diverting U. S.  military counterterrorism assistance  to an abusive military campaign unrelated to terrorist  threats, a prominent human rights group has learned from  Wikileaks. Human Rights Watch (HRW) said that U. S.  diplomatic cables  released by Wikileaks this month stated that Yemen in 2009  repeatedly diverted U. S. -supported Yemeni counterterrorism  forces and possibly U. S. -supplied military vehicles to  assist the government's fight against northern Huthi rebels.  In the cables, U. S.  diplomats complain that their requests  for Yemen to halt such diversions were having little effect.   Human Rights Watch has documented numerous possible  violations of the laws of war by government as well as rebel  forces in the Huthi conflict.    HWR said the U. S.  should also investigate reported Saudi use  of U. S. -supplied military hardware in the Yemeni-Huthi  conflict. The leaked cables also confirm that the U. S. , not the Yemeni  government, carried out missile strikes in December 2009 in  the south of the country, including one that killed 42 local  residents. 'The U. S.  should not tolerate the misuse of such resources  because it could implicate the U. S.  in Yemen's abusive  practices,' Letta Tayler, terrorism and counterterrorism  researcher for HRW, told IPS.  HRW called on the U. S.  government to investigate Yemen's  apparent diversion of U. S.  counterterrorism assistance and  suspend such aid unless the misuse has stopped.  The Obama administration and the U. S.  Congress also should  investigate reported Saudi use of U. S. -supplied ammunition  in Yemen and U. S.  missile strikes in Yemen, including a 2009  attack that killed several dozen local residents, HRW said. U. S.  military assistance to Yemen more than doubled from $67  million to $150 million in 2010 and is expected to increase  to $250 million in 2011 in response to efforts by Yemen- based Al Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula to carry out attacks  abroad. Since 2002, the U. S.  has spent more than $115 million on  Yemeni counterterrorism forces, including the elite Counter- Terrorism Unit that U. S.  diplomats say in cables was  deployed to attack northern rebel forces. Human Rights Watch's April 2010 report on the Huthi- government armed conflict in northern Yemen, 'All Quiet on  the Northern Front?', documents credible allegations that  Yemeni government forces indiscriminately shelled and bombed  civilian areas in its fight against the Huthis, causing  civilian casualties, and used child soldiers.  Those  practices violate the laws of war.  It also found violations  by Huthi forces. U. S.  investigations should include an assessment of steps  that U. S.  embassy officials in 2009 said that they would  take to address shortcomings in their 'End-Use Monitoring  Agreement' - a pact that allows the U. S.  to check if Yemen  misused or illicitly transferred any U. S.  security  assistance. The U. S.  government should take an equally hard look at its  own military's conduct in Yemen, Human Rights Watch said.   One diplomatic cable leaked by Wikileaks from December 2009  recounts how Yemeni President Ali Abdullah Saleh promised  U. S.  Gen.  David H.  Petraeus that he would continue to  falsely claim that U. S.  missile strikes against suspected  AQAP targets were Yemeni operations.    Those strikes included the Dec.  17 cruise missile attack in  the southern province of Abyan that killed at least 42  people, the majority of them women and children.  The Abyan  strike reportedly used cluster munitions, weapons that are  banned by more than 100 countries because they are unable to  distinguish between military and civilian people and  objects.  U. S.  officials have refused to publicly confirm media  reports that the U. S.  military carried out the airstrike. 'The U. S.  should immediately conduct an impartial review of  the Abyan strike to ensure compliance with international  law, including the prohibition against indiscriminate  attacks that harm civilians,' Tayler said.  'The Obama  administration has yet to clarify the legal basis for such  strikes. 'Additional U. S.  cables that Wikileaks made public show that  Saudi Arabia, which was a party to the Yemeni-Huthi conflict  at least from November 2009 until early February 2010,  sought ammunition from the U. S.  specifically for use in its  military engagement against Huthi forces.  A cable from the U. S.  embassy in Riyadh dated Dec.  30, 2009,  said that the U. S.  responded 'with alacrity' to the request  and supplied ammunition. The Saudi deputy minister of defence, Prince Khaled bin  Sultan, on Nov.  10, 2009 announced Saudi Arabia was  establishing a 10-kilometre buffer zone inside Yemen.  A  Saudi official characterised the zone as 'no place for  civilians', raising concerns that civilian immunity would  not be respected. In 'All Quiet on the Northern Front?', HRW reported that  Huthi rebels had claimed that on Dec.  13, 2009, multiple  Saudi airstrikes had hit a public market in Bani Mu'in in  Razih district in Sa'da governorate, allegedly killing 70  civilians and injuring hundreds more. A U. S.  embassy cable from Riyadh dated Feb.  7, 2010 voiced  concern that Saudi strikes hit a 'Yemeni medical clinic',  which Prince Khaled seemed to acknowledge, claiming it was  used by Huthi forces. Based on Prince Khaled's assurances that Saudi forces would  take care to avoid civilian objects, the U. S.  ambassador  recommended that the U. S.  also supply satellite imagery of  the conflict to Saudi Arabia. 