The Barack Obama administration's claim of 'progress' in its  war strategy is based on the military seizure of three rural  districts outside Kandahar City in October. But those tactical gains have come at the price of further  exacerbating the basic U. S.  strategic weakness in  Afghanistan — the antagonism toward the foreign presence  shared throughout the Pashtun south.  The military offensive in Kandahar, which had been opposed  clearly and vocally by the local leadership in the province,  was accompanied by an array of military tactics marked by  increased brutality.  The most prominent of those tactics was  a large-scale demolition of homes that has left widespread  bitterness among the civilians who had remained in their  villages when the U. S. -NATO offensive was launched, as well  as those who had fled before the offensive.  The unprecedented home demolition policy and other harsh  tactics used in the offensive suggest that Gen.  Petraeus has  abandoned the pretense that he will ever win over the  population in those Taliban strongholds.  The New York Times first reported the large-scale demolition  of houses in a Nov.  16 story that said U. S.  troops in  Arghandab, Zhari and Panjwaii districts had been using  armoured bulldozers, high explosives, missiles and  airstrikes in 'routinely destroying almost every unoccupied  home or unused farm building in areas where they are  operating'. Neither U. S.  nor Afghan officials have offered any estimate  of the actual number of homes destroyed, but a spokesman for  the provincial governor told the Times that the number of  houses demolished was 'huge'.  Confirming the widespread demolition policy, Col.  Hans Bush,  a spokesman for Petraeus, suggested that it was necessary to  provide security, because so many houses were 'booby- trapped' with explosives.  But Bush also acknowledged that U. S.  troops were using a  wide array of 'tools' to eliminate tree lines in which  insurgents could hide.  And the demolition policy was clearly  driven primarily by ISAF's concerns about the IED war that  the Taliban has been winning in 2010.  The Washington Post's Rajiv Chandrasekaran revealed in a  Nov.  19 article that, in one operation in Zhari district,  the military had used more than a dozen mine clearing  charges, each of which destroyed everything - houses, trees,  and crops - in a 100-yard-long path wide enough for a tank.  The district governor in Arghandab, Shah Muhammed Ahmadi,  acknowledged that entire villages had been destroyed — a  policy he defended by claiming that there were no people  left in them.  '[I]n some villages, like Khosrow,' he said,  'that we've found completely empty and full of IEDs, we  destroy them without agreement, because it was hard to find  the people, and not just Khosrow but many villages we had to  destroy to make them safe. 'But Col.  David Flynn, the battalion commander of a unit of  the 101st Airborne Division responsible for a section of the  district, contradicted the claim that demolition was only  carried out if the people who owned the houses could not be  found.  Flynn told reporters of London's Daily Mail he had issued an  ultimatum to residents of Khosrow Sofia: provide full  information on the location of IEDs the Taliban had planted  there or face destruction of the village, according to the  account published Oct.  26.  Flynn told the reporters that one of his platoons had a  casualty rate of 50 percent in the village. Flynn later claimed that the residents had responded to his  threat by clearing out all the IEDs themselves, according to  Carl Forsberg of the Institute for the Study of War.   Researcher and author Alex Strick Van Linschoten, one of the  only two Westerners to have lived independently in Kandahar  City in recent years, said a friend had been told the same  thing.  However, Linschoten told IPS that he understands from an  eyewitness that at least two other villages in Flynn's area  of responsibility, including the nearby Khosrow Ulya, were  leveled and one was reduced to 'a dust bowl'.  District chief Ahmad referred to 'Khosrow' as one of the  villages he said the Americans 'had to destroy to make them  safe'. The threat to destroy a village if its residents did not  come forward with information would be a 'collective  penalty' against the civilian population, which is strictly  forbidden by the 1949 Geneva Convention Relative to the  Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War.  It is unclear how widely the threat to demolish homes was  used in Zhari and Panjwaii and how many of the villages were  destroyed in retribution for refusing to do so.  According to data provided by the Pentagon's Joint IED  Defeat Organization (JIEDDO), however, only 13 IEDs were  turned in by the population in the entire country in  October.   That suggests that the residents of the newly occupied  villages in the three districts did not provide any  information about IEDs. The house demolition policy and the increased use of  collective punishment were part of a broader strategy of  increasing the pressure against the Pashtun population in  the south.  The level of targeted raids by U. S.  Special  Operations Forces against suspected Taliban was tripled  before Petraeus took over command from Gen.  Stanley  McChrystal in June, even though McChrystal acknowledged  publicly that those raids generated intense anger across the  country against foreign forces.  Although those targeted raids killed and captured a large  number of Taliban commanders, they also subjected thousands  of part-time guerrillas and supporters to arrest and  detention.  The effort to weaken the Taliban insurgency  through such violent tactics is bound to continue the cycle  of more Pashtuns vowing revenge against foreign troops and  rejecting the Afghan government. Journalist Anand Gopal, a Pashtun-speaking specialist on  Afghanistan, discovered another form of collective  punishment practiced during the offensive.  Gopal told IPS  that people in Zhari district reported two cases in which  U. S.  and Afghan forces rounded up and detained virtually  everyone in a village after receiving small arms fire from  it.  The house demolitions in Kandahar have apparently affected  many thousands of people.  The demolitions 'have made a whole  lot of people very angry, because they will be cold and  hungry in the coming months', said a U. S.  source who asked  not to be identified. But the U. S. -NATO command is evidently unconcerned about  that anger.  Chandrasekaran quoted a 'senior official' as  asserting that, by forcing people to go to the district  governor's office to submit their claims for damaged  property, 'in effect you're connecting the government to the  people. 'Now Brig.  Gen.  Nick Carter, commander of U. S. -NATO troops in  southern Afghanistan, has openly embraced that justification  of the house demolition policy.  In an interview with AfPak  Channel published last week, he suggested that the  demolition of houses 'allows the district governor to  connect with the population…'But that connection is certain to be marked by bitterness.  A  tribal elder in Panjawaii was quoted by the Post's  Chandrasekaran as dismissing the offer of compensation for  houses destroyed as 'just kicking dirt in our eyes. ' The new level of brutality used in the Kandahar operation  indicates that Petraeus has consciously jettisoned the  central assumption of his counterinsurgency theory, which is  that harsh military measures undermine the main objective of  winning over the population.  But there are tell-tale signs that higher-level commanders  in Kandahar know that those tactics will not defeat the  Taliban either.  Col.  Flynn, the U. S.  commander in a section  of Arghandab, told the Daily Mail, 'At the end of the day,  you cannot kill your way to victory here.  It will have to be  a political solution. ' *Gareth Porter is an investigative historian and journalist  specialising in U. S.  national security policy.  The paperback  edition of his latest book, 'Perils of Dominance: Imbalance  of Power and the Road to War in Vietnam', was published in  2006. 