Few in Washington want to talk much about Iraq these days. Eager to avoid refighting the intense political battles over  Iraq during the George W.  Bush administration, both  Democrats and Republicans seem to have tacitly agreed on a  set of lowest-common-denominator premises: the initial  decision to invade may have been questionable, but the 2007  surge worked, and Iraq is now on a slow-but-sure path to  recovery. Stability and prosperity will gradually improve, or maybe  they won't, but in any case Iraqis will have to sort out  their problems for themselves. Reidar Visser's forcefully argued new book, 'A Responsible  End? The United States and the Iraqi Transition, 2005-2010'  (Just World Books, 2010), takes aim at this complacent  consensus.  His pessimistic assessment is that the 'U. S.   fail[ed] to exploit a real window of hopefulness in Iraq  between July 2008 and January 2010, thanks above all to the  combined illiteracy of the Bush and Obama administrations'  concerning Iraqi politics. As a result, what halting political progress there has been  since 2003 is now being reversed, as the possibility of a  nationally-based and non-sectarian Iraqi politics slips  away. Most writing in English about Iraq tends to be directed  almost exclusively through the prism of the security  situation, dwelling on body counts and suicide bombings  while tacking on perfunctory warnings about the necessity of  vaguely-defined 'political progress' at the end. The strength of Visser's book, which collects and expands  writings published between 2005 and 2010 on his websites  Historiae. org and Gulf Analysis, is precisely its in-depth  exploration of the political situation and its sharply-drawn  conclusions about what sort of political progress is  necessary for Iraq. Visser makes no attempt to conceal his sympathies.  In his  view any viable political solution must be relatively  centralised rather than partitioned, broadly nationalist  rather than narrowly sectarian, indigenously-rooted rather  than dependent on Iran. These views are themselves rooted in his somewhat  revisionist take on Iraqi history.  Most amateur observers of  Iraqi politics — the present reviewer included — have been  brought up on the familiar story that Iraq was an artificial  creation stitched together by the British after World War I  from three distinct and rather incompatible Ottoman  provinces (one Sunni, one Shiite, and one Kurdish). By this interpretation, sectarian conflict is virtually  hard-wired into Iraq's DNA, and the natural temptation is to  look for a solution either in an authoritarian strongman or  in some form of federalism or partition along ethnic and  sectarian lines. In what is perhaps the book's most interesting chapter,  Visser argues against this 'artificiality' thesis.  For one  thing, he suggests, Iraq's supposedly distinct constituent  parts have always been far more heterogeneous, both  ethnically and religiously, than is widely supposed.  More  than that, Iraqi nationalism has been a widespread and  viable phenomenon dating back to Ottoman times. To this day, therefore, outside observers consistently  underestimate the level of allegiance felt by Iraqis to the  Iraqi national state as such, and overstate the degree of  popular support among the Iraqi people for various  federalist and separatist alternatives. Visser is excoriating in his criticism of various public  figures, most notably U. S.  Vice President Joe Biden and  author and diplomat Peter Galbraith, who have urged forms of  'soft partition' for Iraq.  While fiercely critical of the  initial 2003 invasion and the Bush administration's handling  of the war, Visser suggests that the Democrats, in their  zeal to arrive at an alternative to the Bush approach, have  been rather indiscriminate and insufficiently critical about  the alternatives they have proposed. More than simply resulting in faulty analysis, Visser  suggests, misconceptions about Iraqi sectarianism have  concrete implications for policy, leading the U. S.  to devote  inordinate attention to identifying representative leaders  of each group and bringing them 'inside the tent' -  arrangements that often come at the expense of effective  governance at the national level.  In line with his emphasis on the necessity of a centralised  nationalist government, Visser is generally sceptical of  what he terms the 'centrifugal forces' pushing for greater  decentralisation, such as the Kurdish parties and  particularly the Islamic Supreme Council of Iraq (ISCI,  formerly SCIRI) — the Shiite Islamist party with close ties  to Iran. One of the ironies of U. S.  policy, Visser notes, is that  although the U. S.  has frequently agonised about Iranian  influence in Iraq, for much of the war it stubbornly refused  to look beyond ISCI to other potential Shiite partners who  were more distant from Iran. Foremost among these, he argues, were the followers of  Muqtada al-Sadr — who, despite his frequent description in  the Western media as an 'Iranian proxy', had little  relationship with Tehran until U. S.  hostility pushed him  into the Iranian orbit.  As a result of its myopic reliance  on ISCI, the U. S.  actually ended up empowering precisely the  pro-Iranian Shiites whom it claimed to fear. In any case, the brief window beginning in 2008 when a  viable non-sectarian politics was possible has in Visser's  view likely passed.  In the wake of the 2010 elections —  which were marred by the disastrous de-Baathification  campaign masterminded by onetime U. S.  favourite Ahmed  Chalabi — he concludes that 'Iraq's democratization could  hardly be described as anything other than a failure. 'There is little to find fault with in Visser's thorough and  depressing book, although it would have been useful to see  him examine his core analytic assumptions in more depth.  He  generally treats achieving a strong, centralised,  nationalist Iraqi government as a self-evidently worthwhile  goal, and it may very well be. Yet this sort of government is, of course, perfectly  compatible with a great deal of authoritarianism and  brutality.  In addition to arguing against sectarians and  partitionists, therefore, Visser could usefully have dwelled  a bit more on how a strong central state might safeguard  against, or at least mitigate, such authoritarian  tendencies. On the whole, however, Visser's account is well worth  reading for anyone interested in the fate of the U. S.   adventure in Iraq.  Without understanding the failures of  U. S.  policy thus far, he shows, there can be no realistic  hope for a better future. 