This week's leak to the New York Times of a proposal for U. S.   Special Operations Forces (SOF) raids against Afghan insurgent  sanctuaries in Pakistan may be intended to put more pressure  on the Pakistani military to take action against those  sanctuaries. But the proposal for such cross-border raids also reflects a  real demand from the U. S. -NATO command in Afghanistan to  target insurgent leaders inside Pakistan if the Pakistani  military does not respond to the threat, according to a U. S.   source familiar with discussions at the International  Security Assistance Force (ISAF) headquarters in Kabul.  And the position of the Barack Obama administration on the  necessity of attacking insurgent safe havens in Pakistan  appears to be in line with the proposal for cross-border  raids. Carrying out such raids would probably provoke a new level  of anti-U. S.  sentiment in Pakistan, with dangerous political  consequences in that country, according to experts on  Pakistan, but the behaviour of the national security organs  of the United States in the recent past suggests that such  dangers are being rationalised. The New York Times reported Monday that 'senior American  military commanders' — meaning Gen.  David Petraeus and his  subordinates at ISAF — are pushing for raids into Pakistan  aimed at capturing Taliban commanders and taking them back  to Afghanistan for interrogation.  Rear Adm.  Gregory Smith, the primary spokesman for ISAF,  issued a statement saying, 'There is absolutely no truth to  reporting in The New York Times that U. S.  forces are  planning to conduct ground operations into Pakistan. ' That did not amount to a real denial of the Times story,  however.  The story did not say that U. S.  forces were  'planning to conduct' such raids.  In fact, it made clear  that Obama had not yet made any decision on the proposal.  Shuja Nawaz, director of the Atlantic Council's South Asia  Center and a leading authority on the Pakistani military,  sees the leak of the proposal for more cross-border raids as  a form of 'psychological warfare' aimed at getting the  Pakistani military leadership to take action against the  Haqqani network sanctuaries in Northern Waziristan.  Nawaz told IPS, however, that the timing for such an impact  is off, because the Pakistani military could not launch any  new offensive there until next February in any case, because  of the weather.  Furthermore, it still lacks the helicopters  necessary for such operations, he said. The proposed U. S.  cross-border operations are 'a perfect  recipe for ruining even this bad relationship', said Nawaz.   They would 'disrupt the whole enterprise in Pakistan,  including the civilian government'.  Political opponents of  the existing government would be 'screaming for blood', he  added, and the military would feel that it had to act  against the government.  The U. S.  National Intelligence Council warned the George W.   Bush White House in August 2008 that SOF raids across the  border in Pakistan would threaten the unity of the Pakistani  military.  A disproportionate percentage of army officers  serving in the largely Pashtun tribal areas are Pashtun, the  Council observed, and if U. S.  commando raids continued  beyond a few months, it could provoke large-scale defections  from the Pakistani army to the militants. The intelligence warning came only after Bush had approved a  request from the Joint Special Operations Command (JSOC) for  more latitude in carrying out raids against al Qaeda and  Afghan insurgent targets in Pakistan's tribal area.  The first raid in early September 2008 killed six children,  two women and at least 10 innocent villagers who came out of  their houses to see what was happening.  When the Pakistani  government and military responded angrily and threatened to  disrupt cooperation with Washington, the raids were  terminated. The policy being pursued by the Obama administration,  however, tends to insulate it from such warnings of  potentially disastrous consequences of an aggressive U. S.   military role in Pakistan.  The administration increased the  number of CIA drone strikes in northwest Pakistan over that  of the Bush administration — a policy requiring that it  discount the political fallout of the drone campaign in  Pakistan.  The CIA has also set up 'fusion centres' with the Pakistani  intelligence agency, the ISI, aimed at making the Pakistani  military more dependent on U. S.  intelligence and less likely  to be responsive to public opposition to U. S.  military  activities in Pakistan.  The idea of sending SOF units into Pakistan to try to  capture insurgent leaders was first discussed last spring,  when Gen.  Stanley McChrystal was still top commander of  U. S. -NATO forces in Afghanistan, according to a U. S.  source  familiar with the discussions about the issue in Kabul.  A number of Delta Force troops in Pakistan were already  operating covertly in the northwest tribal region, according  to the source, and the CIA's secret Afghan militia units,  the Counterterrorism Pursuit Teams, were also being sent  into Pakistan's tribal area to target Taliban and Haqqani  network insurgents. But McChrystal and Petraeus 'believed they needed a much  bigger footprint on the ground to do it,' the source told  IPS. The Petraeus proposal had apparently been submitted to the  administration some time ago.  But the story quoted a 'senior  American officer' as saying, 'We've never been as close as  we are now to getting the go-ahead to go across. ' The leak to the Times followed the circulation within the  administration of two National Intelligence Estimates on  Afghanistan and Pakistan.  The NIE on Afghanistan reportedly  included the first formal judgment that the United States is  unlikely to succeed in Afghanistan unless Pakistan changes  its policy radically and moves decisively against insurgent  sanctuaries in Pakistan.  The estimate on Pakistan concluded that the Pakistani  government is unlikely to change its policy toward the  Taliban and the Haqqani network, as reported by the  Washington Post Dec.  16. The five-page 'Summary of Findings' on the December review  of the Afghan war strategy issued by the administration last  week referred to 'gains' as 'fragile and reversible' and  pointedly stated, 'Consolidation of those gains will require  that we make more progress with Pakistan to eliminate  sanctuaries for violent extremist networks. ' The continued existence of sanctuaries in Pakistan and the  failure of the Pakistani military to cooperate fully with  U. S.  strategy could have been cited by the administration as  reason for speeding up the process of withdrawal of U. S.   troops from Afghanistan rather than supporting a new  military adventure in Pakistan.  But the Obama administration has painted itself into a  corner by refusing to acknowledge publicly that the Petraeus  war strategy is not working, despite obvious scepticism  about it in the White House.  A Dec.  16 story in the  Washington Post reported that senior officials had already  decided to base the administration's arguments for a  'significant drawdown' of troops to begin in July 2011 not  on the obvious failure of the Gen.  Petraeus's strategy but  on his claims that the strategy is succeeding. They consider that course 'less politically dangerous' than  arguing that the Petraeus strategy hadn't worked, according  to the Post story.  'It's always better to call it success as  opposed to failure,' a senior official was quoted as saying.  Also favouring the proposal for cross-border raids is the  fact that those in the administration who sought to limit  the number of troops and the duration of their stay in  Afghanistan — including Vice-President Joe Biden — have  relied heavily on SOF units to target Taliban insurgents  both in Afghanistan and across the border in Pakistan, as  Bob Woodward documents in 'Obama's War'. The alternative to the McChrystal counterinsurgency strategy  supported by Biden and others last year envisioned possible  SOF raids on sanctuaries in Pakistan, according to a report  in The Times of London Tuesday.  *Gareth Porter is an investigative historian and journalist  specialising in U. S.  national security policy.  The paperback  edition of his latest book, 'Perils of Dominance: Imbalance  of Power and the Road to War in Vietnam', was published in  2006. 