The U. S.  move to send 30,000 more troops to Afghanistan may be  seen in Washington as the only effective and viable strategy  to stabilise the country, but not everyone in the diplomatic  community here at U. N.  headquarters agrees. 'I am not an expert on military matters.  [But] the solution  to the Afghan situation is not the military one,' Staffan de  Mistura, the top U. N.  official in Afghanistan, told IPS in  response to a question about whether an increased U. S.   military presence would be helpful in bringing peace. De Mistura, a long-serving Swedish diplomat, briefed the  U. N.  Security Council Wednesday about the situation in  Afghanistan.  He stressed the need for a political solution,  and said avoiding civilian casualties was a 'must' to make  international efforts for peace and development a success.  His take on the military aspect of the conflict's resolution  also resonated in the speeches of several diplomats who took  part in the discussions.  Speaker after speaker emphasised  that political dialogue, national reconciliation and  development initiatives were the key. 'Success doesn't depend on military operations,' Mexican  ambassador Claude Heller told the Council.  In his view, the  situation in Afghanistan demands intense efforts for  development and increased efforts to protect the lives of  civilians who are falling victim to armed attacks from both  sides. Diplomats from France, Brazil, Iran and several other  countries noted that as a result of the prolonged military  conflict, more and more civilians were suffering and said  that effective measures must be taken to facilitate the  transition of power to Afghan authorities due to take place  in 2014. At a NATO summit held in Lisbon in November, it was agreed  that security would be handed over to Afghan authorities by  that date, and that before and during the transition process  the world community would intensify its efforts to help  Afghanistan rebuild itself from the ruins of war. 'Afghanistan needs the sustained support of the  international community,' said Wang Min, the Chinese deputy  ambassador to the U. N. , reflecting on the transition  process.  But the initiatives for peace, reconciliation and  development must be 'Afghan-led and Afghan-owned', he added. Many diplomats agreed that in addition to international  support, Afghanistan needed to reach out to its neighbours  to improve its economic and social conditions, which have  fast deteriorated due to the armed conflict. One of Afghanistan's neighbours, Iran, said it fully  supported the idea of regional cooperation for the country's  reconstruction, but added that the prolonged military  presence of foreign troops in Afghanistan was making it hard  for its neighbours to take effective measures for  peacemaking. 'Nine years have passed since American and NATO forces  entered Afghanistan.  The main justification of the military  incursion was eliminating the threat of terrorism,' said  Iranian envoy Eshagh Alehabib.  'However, it is very hard to  assess the achievement so far and the prospect for the  future. 'Alehabib noted that, 'even [in] the newly unveiled Military  Strategy Review, the U. S.  government casts some doubts on  the attainment of [its] desired goals. 'Referring to the growing civilian casualties, he asked  whether 'we could [more accurately] call this situation an  achievement for the military forces'.  'Putting the lives of innocent people at the mercy of drone  attacks, yes - prima facie, there has been some  achievement,' he noted. U. S.  envoy Rosemary DiCarlo defended Washington's strategy  in Afghanistan.  'We have broadly arrested the Taliban's  momentum,' she said.  '[But those gains] are still fragile. 'She told the Council members that Afghan forces would take  full responsibility for security by 2014.  However, she made  it clear that the transition process would be gradual.  'It's  a transition strategy, not an exit strategy,' DiCarlo said. Since October 2001 when the U. S.  launched military  operations in Afghanistan, nearly 20,000 Afghans have been  killed and about half a million wounded, according to  iCasualties. org, an independent group formerly known as Iraq  Body Count. For its part, the U. S. -led coalition forces have lost 2,100  soldiers as a result of armed attacks by Taliban fighters in  the nine years of war that shows no sign of an imminent end,  according to analysts. Last week, the Red Cross International issued a statement  from Kabul warning that there were likely to be more  civilian casualties in 2011. 'We are growing increasingly concerned about the conflict.   It's spreading and intensifying and we're [likely] to see  another year of conflict with dramatic consequences for  civilians,' Reto Stocker, president of the International  Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) office in Afghanistan,  said on Dec.  15.  Civilian deaths and injuries resulting from the conflict  have continued to rise over the past two years and civilian  communities have been forced to take sides in the war, the  organisation said.  