The official line of the International Security Assistance  Force (ISAF), the NATO command in Afghanistan, is that the war  against Afghan insurgents is vital to the security of all the  countries providing troops there. In fact, however, NATO was given a central role in  Afghanistan because of the influence of U. S.  officials  concerned with the alliance, according to a U. S.  military  officer who was in a position to observe the decision-making  process.  'NATO's role in Afghanistan is more about NATO than it is  about Afghanistan,' the officer, who insisted on anonymity  because of the political sensitivity of the subject, told  IPS in an interview. The alliance would never have been given such a prominent  role in Afghanistan but for the fact that the George W.  Bush  administration wanted no significant U. S.  military role  there that could interfere with their plans to take control  of Iraq. That reality gave U. S.  officials working on NATO an opening. Gen.  James Jones, the Supreme Allied Commander Europe  (SACEUR) from 2003 to 2005, pushed aggressively for giving  NATO the primary security role in Afghanistan, according to  the officer.  'Jones sold [Defence Secretary Donald] Rumsfeld on turning  Afghanistan over to NATO,' said the officer, adding that he  did so with the full support of Pentagon officials with  responsibilities for NATO.  'You have to understand that the  NATO lobbyists are very prominent in the Pentagon — both in  the Office of the Secretary of Defence and on the Joint  Staff,' said the officer.  Jones admitted in an October 2005 interview with American  Forces Press Service that NATO had struggled to avoid  becoming irrelevant after the collapse of the Soviet Union  and the dissolution of the Warsaw Pact.  'NATO was in limbo  for a bit,' he said.  But the 9/11 attacks had offered a new opportunity for NATO  to demonstrate its relevance. The NATO allies were opposed to the U. S.  war in Iraq, but  they wanted to demonstrate their support for stabilising and  reconstructing Afghanistan.  Jones prodded NATO member  countries to provide troops for Afghanistan and to extend  NATO operations from the north into the west and eventually  to the east and south, where U. S.  troops were concentrated. That position coincided with the interests of NATO's  military and civilian bureaucrats and those of the military  establishments in the member countries.  But there was one major problem: public opinion in NATO  member countries was running heavily against military  involvement in Afghanistan.  To get NATO allies to increase their troop presence in  Afghanistan from 2003 to 2005, Jones assured member states  that they would only be mopping up after the U. S.  military  had defeated the Taliban.  On a visit to Afghanistan in  August 2004, Jones said, '[W]e should not ever even think  that there is going to be an insurrection of the type that  we see in Iraq here.  It's just not going to happen. 'Reassured by Washington and by Jones, in September 2005,  NATO defence ministers agreed formally that NATO would  assume command of southern Afghanistan in 2006.  But conflicts immediately arose between the U. S.  and NATO  member countries over the NATO mission in Afghanistan.   Britain, Germany, Canada and the Netherlands had all sold  the NATO mission to their publics as 'peacekeeping' or  'reconstruction' as distinct from counterinsurgency war. When the Bush administration sought to merge the U. S.  and  NATO commands in Afghanistan, key allies pushed back,  arguing the two commands had different missions.  The French,  meanwhile, were convinced the Bush administration was using  NATO troops to fill the gap left by shifting U. S.  troops  from Afghanistan to Iraq - a war they strongly opposed.  The result was that one NATO member state after another  adopted 'caveats' that ruled out or severely limited their  troops from actually carrying out combat in Afghanistan.  Even as the Bush administration was assuring its NATO allies  that they would not have to face a major Taliban uprising,  U. S.  intelligence was reporting that the insurgency was  growing and would intensify in spring 2006.  Gen.  Karl Eikenberry, who had just arrived as commander of  all U. S.  troops in Afghanistan in 2005, and newly appointed  U. S.  Ambassador Ronald E.  Neumann were warning Washington  that the well-publicised domestic debates in NATO member  states over troop commitments were 'generating a perception  of NATO political weakness', as Neumann recalls in his  memoirs on Afghanistan published in 2009.  Neumann wrote that both he and Eikenberry believed 'the  insurgents would see ISAF's expansion and the U. S.   contraction as the moment to rekindle the war. ' But Eikenberry assured the news media that the insurgency  was under control.  In a Dec.  8, 2005 press briefing at the  Pentagon, Eikenberry asserted that the more aggressive  Taliban tactics were 'very much a sign of weakness'.  Asked if he wasn't concerned that the situation in  Afghanistan was 'sliding towards an Iraqi scenario',  Eikenberry replied, '[W]e see no indications that such is  the case. . . ' A few weeks later the Taliban launched the biggest offensive  since its regime was ousted in 2001, seizing control of much  of Helmand, Kandahar and several other southern provinces.  Eikenberry, clearly under orders from Rumsfeld, continued to  carry out the policy of turning the south over to NATO in  mid-2006.  He was rewarded in early 2007 by being sent to  Brussels as deputy chairman of NATO's Military Committee. Eikenberry acknowledged in testimony before Congress in  February 2007 that the policy of turning Afghanistan over to  NATO was really about the future of NATO rather than about  Afghanistan.  He noted the argument that failure in  Afghanistan could 'break' NATO, while hailing the new NATO  role in Afghanistan as one that could 'make' the alliance.  'The long view of the Afghanistan campaign,' said  Eikenberry, 'is that it is a means to continue the  transformation of the alliance. 'The Afghanistan mission, Eikenberry said, 'could mark the  beginning of sustained NATO efforts to overhaul alliance  operational practices in every domain. ' Specifically, he  suggested that NATO could use Afghan deployments to press  some member nations to carry out 'military modernisation'. But Canadian General Rick Hillier, who commanded NATO forces  in Afghanistan from February to August 2004 and was later  chief of staff of Canadian armed forces from 2005 to 2008,  wrote in his memoir 'A Soldier First', published in 2009,  that NATO was an unmitigated disaster in Afghanistan. He recalled that when it formally accepted responsibility  for Afghanistan in 2003, NATO had 'no strategy, no clear  articulation of what it wanted to achieve' and that its  performance was 'abysmal'.  Hillier said the situation 'remains unchanged' after several  years of NATO responsibility for Afghanistan.  NATO had  'started down a road that destroyed much of its credibility  and in the end eroded support for the mission in every  nation in the alliance,' Hillier wrote. 'Afghanistan has revealed,' wrote Hiller, 'that NATO has  reached the stage where it is a corpse decomposing. . . ' *Gareth Porter is an investigative historian and journalist  specialising in U. S.  national security policy.  The paperback  edition of his latest book, 'Perils of Dominance: Imbalance  of Power and the Road to War in Vietnam', was published in  2006. 