This is the story of Francis Odong, a southern Sudanese man  from Eastern Equitoria state. There is nothing extraordinary about his story, at least by  the standards of tales of the 'lost boys', of children being  separated from their families because of the civil war and  finding their way west via refugee camps in neighbouring  countries. Nevertheless, that Francis's story is considered ordinary in  south Sudan reflects the reality of life here.  While he did  not have to face the trauma of becoming a child soldier, he  was forced to cross a border, alone, aged just 14, and to  live in refugee camps.  His story is one of many young  Sudanese: of a life derailed, almost at its outset. It is also a story about living in the tumultuous period  between 1983 and 2005, when more than two million people  died of war and war-related causes in Sudan.  When over four  million people were internally displaced in southern Sudan  and nearly two million southern Sudanese fled across  borders.  This is the story of a teenager determined to fight his way  out of his predicament through education.  Of a certain  dignity that comes so easily to the poor; the urge for an  education despite starting out late; not missing out on  studies through three civil wars; of studying to become a  paramedic while juggling a full-time job. 'It is tough.  I begin my day at 8 am with practical work at  the hospital till 12 noon, then classroom lessons till 3pm,  and then work till 10:30 pm or 11 pm.  But then, my life has  not always been easy,' says Francis, softly, at the end of  his shift at the Lugali House hotel in Juba, southern Sudan. In the next few days, he will be writing his last test of  his three-year course.  He is sure to find a job in the NGO  sector, he says.  He has made some contacts among guests at  the hotel, many of whom are there to play midwife to the  birth of a nation. Week-long voteThat process is set to begin on Jan.  9 with a week-long  referendum vote that will decide whether southern Sudan will  remain with the north or not.  That the south will decide to  separate is the forgone conclusion amongst most observers. Francis's trials and tribulations reflect the torturous  timeline of south Sudan over the past few decades.  He was  born in 1978, a period of relative peace after an agreement  in 1972 ended the first civil war between the north and the  south that had started a year before Sudan's independence in  1956. For Francis, that peace lasted for only the first five years  of his life.  Just when he was ready to start school, war  broke out again in 1983.  He had to wait another eight years  to enter a classroom. While hostilities between the north and south soon tapered,  a more brutal internecine war broke out in his state.  That  is when his parents decided to send him across the border to  Uganda in 1993. When the fighting intensified, his parents soon followed him  into Uganda.  They were, however, taken to a different camp. While they were soon reunited, even this respite was short- lived.  The notorious Lord’s Resistance Army destroyed their  camp, and, once again, it was time to move. For Francis, the only thing that remained consistent in his  life through this time were his studies.  After his senior O- levels, he specialised in science subjects for his A-level  examinations.  That led him to become a teacher in a refugee  camp. After the Comprehensive Peace Treaty that ended the civil  war in southern Sudan was signed in 2005, Francis made his  way back home in 2006. He came to Juba and joined a diploma course to become a  paramedic.  His parents came back a year later, heading to  their village in Eastern Equatoria to start farming again. But Francis's troubles were not yet over.  His medical school  was shut down abruptly for a year, leaving Francis in limbo.   Without any financial help from an autonomous government  that was supposed to be closer to its people, Francis is  forced to work. 'We are supposed to get scholarships, but the government of  Eastern Equitoria has its own reasons for not giving them  out,' says Francis.  The annual fee for his course is 1,500  Sudanese pounds (600 U. S.  dollars). Plans for a better futureWith his monthly salary of around 900 pounds, Francis looks  after his wife and three-year-old son and manages to send  300 pounds a month to his parents in the village. He has already made plans to ensure a better future for his  son. For Francis, that means sending him to a boarding school in  northern Uganda.  When asked if this would lead to the same  trauma of separation that Francis himself faced as a child,  he clarifies that he would not want that life for his son:  'No, my wife will rent a house near his school to be there  for him. 'Before she does that, she must resolve issues regarding her  own nationality.  A Ugandan, she has been asked to wait until  the referendum is over to start the process of becoming  southern Sudanese. 'This is a common problem for tribes like the Madi, Nimulai  and Kakwa who are found on both sides of the border.  But as  people we are the same,' Francis says. The plans and hopes of a young family echo those of a  nascent nation.  This family’s story is one of being obliged  to East African neighbours for basic needs like education,  and unresolved issues like tribal bonds, borders and  nationality. 