In October 2001, the United Nations Security Council endorsed  a resolution recognising that women's participation is  essential to sustain efforts for peace in the world.  But did  the international body ever ask world's women leaders to take  part in the decision-making process?Activists associated with a global coalition of women's  right activists say the answer is 'no'. 'You cannot do anything [about peace-building] if women are  not engaged in the decision-making process,' said Mavic  Cabrera-Balleza of the Global Network of Women  Peacebuilders, an umbrella organisation of over 80 rights  groups across the world. 'If any policy is to be effectively implemented, you need to  consult with women's representatives,' she told IPS, after  the group sent a letter to the U. N.  Secretary-General Ban  Ki-moon and other senior U. N.  officials, as well as the  member nations of the Security Council. The letter was dated Jan.  7 and released to the media on  Tuesday. Its signers raised critical questions about the lack of  women's participation in the Council's decision-making  processes on issues related to international peace and  security and called for the world body's principle organ to  match its words with deeds. The Security Council resolution on women's role in peace- building, known as UNSCR 1325, envisages participation of  women at all levels of decision-making. In its letter, the global coalition of women's organisations  welcomed the establishment of the new U. N.  Women agency, but  observed that the process of the recent adoption of the  Council resolution 1960 was fraught with shortcomings. 'It speaks only of women as victims of sexual abuse during  violent conflict and does not mention that if women were  recognised as participants in decision-making, they would be  less vulnerable to attack,' said the letter's signers. 'If governments would involve more women and worked harder  to prevent wars there would be less sexual violence,' they  said.  'If small arms were regulated and reduced by involving  women in the decision-making, there would be less sexual  violence. 'The coalition says if the U. N.  leadership and its member  states involved women 'more systematically' in conflict  prevention and resolution, 'there would be a marked  improvement in peace and security for everyone. 'The letter said that there was no crime 'worst for women or  men than rape, the trauma for which remains for a lifetime'.   It further says that rape will be reduced in war time 'only  when greater efforts are made to prevent the violence, when  more women are participating in decision-making. 'Cabrera-Balleza said it is 'sad' that there are only three  women in the Security Council.  'That reflects institutional  and structural imbalance,' she told IPS, referring to the  gender inequality in the Council. Currently, the three women ambassadors who are engaged in  discussing on the international issues of peace and security  come from the United States, Brazil and Nigeria.  The other  12 diplomats on the Council are men. In Belleza's view, it is due to a lack of political will  that women are not able to have their say in the  international action and decision making on matters of war  and peace. 'There is a lot of talk and no walk,' she said.  'The member  states must be required to report on [gender balance in  matters relating to peace and security]. 'When asked by IPS about the letter from women's  organisations, the spokesperson for the secretary-general,  Martin Nesirky, said he would respond later after reviewing  its contents. The Security Council's December 2010 resolution on women's  role in peace-building asks the U. N.  chief to establish  monitoring, analysis and reporting arrangements on conflict- related sexual violence, including rape in situations of  armed conflict. It also 'encourages' the secretary-general to 'engage' with  the U. N.  actors, national institutions, civil society  organisations, healthcare service providers and women groups  to exchange data collection and analysis of incident,  trends, and patterns of rape in conflict situations. But is that really being translated into action?The Global Network of Women Peacebuilders thinks otherwise. 'If the U. N.  member states, particularly those represented  in the Security Council, are serious about their commitments  to women's equality and to stop rape and violence, they … would individually and collectively ensure to women their  full participation in decision-making,' said Balleza. 