United Nations officials said they were 'gravely concerned'  Wednesday that the current political deadlock over recent  presidential elections in Cote d'Ivoire could ultimately lead  to genocide, as both sides of the conflict consolidated their  forces. Addressing reporters at the U. N.  headquarters in New York,  the Secretary-General's Special Advisors on the Prevention  of Genocide and the Responsibility to Protect said 'urgent  action' was needed to prevent further loss of life, and  failure to do so could push the West African nation to the  'brink of destruction'. 'We are disturbed by allegations that the armed forces and  militia groups that back opposing camps in the current  political crisis are recruiting and arming ethnic groups  allied to each camp,' advisors Francis Deng and Edward Luck  said in a joint statement. 'We are also deeply troubled by reports of continuing hate  speech that appears to be aimed at inciting violent attacks  against particular ethnic and national groups,' they said. 'We urge all parties in Cote d'Ivoire to refrain from  inflammatory speech that incites hatred and violence.  Those  responsible for committing atrocities or their incitement  will be held accountable. 'Cote d'Ivoire descended into violence late last year  following the Oct.  31 elections that saw long-term president  Laurent Gbagbo voted out in favour of Alassane Ouattara. Gbagbo, who continues to control the nation's 60,000-strong  armed forces, has refused to step down, despite the U. N. ,  African Union, Economic Community of West African States  (ECOWAS) and the European Union recognising Ouattara as the  legitimate winner. In the ensuing post-electoral violence, the president-elect  has set up camp in Abidjan's Golf Hotel, which is being  subjected to a blockade by Gbagbo. More than 247 people have reportedly been killed in the  fighting between the opposing parties, causing 23,500  Ivorians to flee to neighbouring countries. A further 16,000 people have been internally displaced, as  serious human rights violations on both sides continue to  take place. Addressing concerns about the potential for genocide, the  U. N. 's Special Representative for Cote d'Ivoire, Choi Young- jin, told reporters Tuesday the recent clashes had been both  ethnically and politically driven.  However, he pointed out there had been equal levels of  violence from both parties in the conflict. 'This is not a one-sided ethnic harassment or cleansing,'  Choi said. In an effort to end the stalemate, sanctions against Gbagbo  have already been put in place and ECOWAS is currently  discussing the option of military intervention to compel the  leader to relinquish power. Choi also noted that another option for ending the crisis  would be action by the West African Economic and Monetary  Union, which controlled the Ivorian currency and was putting  pressure on Gbagbo's finances. In a show of determination from the international community,  the Security Council Wednesday authorised the deployment of  an additional 2,000 peacekeepers to Cote d'Ivoire, boosting  the mission to 11,000 troops. Late last month, U. N.  High Commissioner for Human Rights  Navi Pillay also raised the political stakes against Gbagbo  and his military leaders, suggesting the group could face  the International Criminal Court (ICC) for the deaths of  more than 200 people, mostly civilians, in the aftermath of  the elections. At the briefing Wednesday, special advisor Luck told IPS it  was still unclear whether the ICC would pursue charges  against the beleaguered president, with investigations into  the deaths continuing. 'Obviously information derived from those investigations  could be very helpful in deciding whether in fact… crimes  against humanity or war crimes have been committed there,  but I think it would be rather early to speculate on whether  that would be the case,' Luck said. He said the international community remained hopeful the  situation could be resolved peacefully. 'We fear that we're on the brink of something that could be  very destructive but we're not there yet. . . there is still  time for parties to show constraint.  We've not crossed over  the precipice yet but we're fearful. '