The appointment of Hezbollah-backed March 8 movement candidate Najib  Mikati as Lebanon's new prime minister set off violence in Tripoli and Beirut  Tuesday, with mobs attacking journalists and setting fires. 'We have entered a new phase, one of a long-term political crisis and  governance,' says Talal Atrissi, sociology and political science professor at  the Lebanese University. On Jan.  12, 11 of 30 ministers resigned from the Lebanese 'coalition'  government.  The ministers belonged to the March 8 bloc - a pro-Syrian and  Iranian movement spearheaded by the Shiite organisation Hezbollah.  The  resignation was concomitant with the submission of indictments of the  Special Tribunal to Lebanon (STL) - established by the United Nations and the  Lebanese Republic to prosecute persons responsible for the 2005 attack that  resulted in the death of former Prime Minister Rafiq Hariri and in the death or  injury of other persons. In recent months, pressures have been mounting on Hezbollah, which is  allegedly accused of participating, along with Syria, in the assassination of  Hariri.  Indictments - rumoured to name members of Hezbollah - were  submitted by prosecutor Daniel Bellemare to the pre-trial STL judge last  week. Around the world, heads of states scurried to find solutions to the ongoing  crisis.  Two mediation processes, one under Syrian-Saudi sponsorship and  another under Qatar and Turkey’s supervision, were abandoned. In one corner of the conflict there is Hezbollah, which is accusing the STL of  being influenced by the U. S.  and Israel.  The organisation fears indictment of  some of its members would significantly damage its national and regional  image and has thus requested that the Lebanese government publicly  condemn the STL and cease any collaboration with its proceedings. In the other corner is March 14 alliance, a coalition of parties and  independents led by Saad Hariri, Rafiq Hariri’s son.  March 14 is clinging to the  tribunal in hopes that justice will prevail regarding the spate of killings  targeting its leadership since 2005.  Since the killing of Rafiq Hariri, over half a  dozen March 14 public figures have been assassinated - namely Christian  ministers Bassel Fuleihan, Pierre Gemayel, Gebran Tueni, and Antoine  Ghanem, as well as Sunni MP Walid Eido. Polarised views on the situation make it extremely difficult for March 8 and  March 14 to reach a compromise, explains Hilal Khashan, political science  professor at the American University of Beirut. 'The situation in Lebanon reflects the regional political equation and power  play among nations,' says Khashan. Through proxies, such as Hezbollah, Syria has slowly regained the upper hand  in the Lebanese political game.  Hezbollah is also enabling Iran, its main  backer, to play a larger political role in the Arab region and gain leverage in  its nuclear negotiations with the international community. In parallel, March 14’s position has been endorsed by the West.  The U. S.  has  reiterated its unconditional support of the tribunal, which, in the words of  President Barack Obama, must be 'allowed to continue its work, free from  interference and coercion. 'Last week, Hezbollah was able to reshuffle the cards when it pressured Druze  Progressive Socialist Party leader Walid Joumblat to join the ranks of the  opposition.  Joumblat’s support has allowed Hezbollah to secure a  parliamentary majority and nominate billionaire Najib Mikati - a close friend  and business associate of the Syrian Assad clan - for the post of prime  minister, thereby ousting March 14’s nominee, Saad Hariri, from the position. 'Circumventing a main Sunni leader [Saad Hariri] in a country like Lebanon is  a disastrous decision that will certainly reflect negatively on Mikati,' says  Michael Young, political analyst and author of ‘The Ghost of Martyr’s Square’.   'Mikati will be called upon to take a very controversial and serious decision by  cancelling the STL, which will devastate the little legitimacy his government  may have. 'In spite of the gravity of the crisis, specialists interviewed by IPS were  doubtful of a direct military confrontation between March 14 and March 8  occurring in the streets of Beirut. 'For strife to take place, one needs an opponent,' says Atrissi.  'I don’t see  anyone taking arms, for now, against Hezbollah. 'The Party of God is considered Lebanon’s most powerful military organisation,  its clout exceeding that of the Lebanese army. The danger resides in the reaction of radical Sunni Islamic elements, who  could perceive Hezbollah’s actions as an attack against their community.   While terrorist attacks against Shiite areas remain a minute possibility, they  will be very limited in time and scope should they occur, predicts a Salafi  sheikh from the Bekaa, speaking on condition of anonymity. Warnings have been voiced by both sides, nonetheless.  On Jan.  18, Hezbollah  deployed supporters wearing black and equipped with hand-held radios  around Beirut in what was perceived as a quiet show of force. On Jan.  25, after it was clear that Mikati won the votes to become prime  minister, tires were set ablaze by pro-March 14 protestors voicing their anger  in massive demonstrations around Lebanon.  Local TV channel Al-Jadeed  reported gun shots in some areas of Beirut.  A TV truck owned by Al-Jazeera -  a news outlet perceived as biased towards Shiites and Iran - was also  vandalised in Tripoli. 'Hezbollah has been drawn into the minefield of Lebanese sectarian politics.   Lebanon is not Gaza - Iran’s proxy in Palestine.  To control a country like  Lebanon, one has to respect certain ground rules,' said Young.  'Even Syria  [which occupied Lebanon for over 20 years] had come to this realisation by  placing figures with a certain amount of legitimacy in major political posts  related to the Sunnite and Shiite community. 'Adding to the fears of potential unrest, already there is talk of the economic  impact of recent events.  Growth may be cut by half this year as a result of the  political deadlock, which will lead to an increase of the debt to GDP ratio,  according to economist Nassib Ghobril. 'This will, in turn, affect the country’s grade, rated at B by Standard and  Poor’s, and eventually the state’s access to debt,' underlines Ghobril. If one is to look at Lebanon’s past, the current tense situation, dovetailed with  street protests and sit-ins, could extend over a significant time period, says  Khashan.  'In 1969, it took Prime Minister Rachid Karameh nine months to  form a government. 'The 1969 crisis led to the Cairo agreements, which legitimised the Palestinian  presence on Lebanese soil.  The accords also resulted in a 15-year-civil war,  after which the constitution was amended, allowing an equal division of power  between Christians and Muslims. For both parties, the stakes are high.  Hezbollah will undoubtedly fight a  possible indictment to the very end, but how far it is able to go depends on  how much leeway its Syrian ally will allow, according to analysts.  And with  March 14 bonded to the tribunal, the fate of the nation will remain a hostage  on both sides.  