When Andrew Niccol wrote and directed the feature film 'Lord  of War', the story was partly inspired by the life of Viktor  Bout, a Russian businessman suspected of using his air cargo  company as a cover for arms dealing. While he succeeded in trading arms all over the planet — and  especially in war-torn nations like Sierra Leone and Liberia  - for two decades without technically breaking any  international laws, Bout was finally arrested in 2008 in  Thailand, as part of a U. S. -led sting operation.  Scott Stedjan, a senior policy advisor at Oxfam America,  says the case highlights the need for the international  community to address loopholes in global arms trading rules. 'The USA is accusing him of breaking U. S.  law - supporting  terrorism — [but] there isn't really an international law  that he has violated,' Stedjan told IPS. After two years of Russian and U. S.  pressure on Bangkok,  Bout was eventually extradited last November, and has  remained in a New York jail since.  His trial is set to begin  on Sep.  12.  One of Bout's court-appointed lawyers, Sabrina Shroff,  contends the U. S.  government has no right to prosecute Bout  as none of the crimes he is charged with occurred on U. S.   soil — a position rejected by the judge. Though Bout has always pleaded not guilty - and Shroff  repeatedly told IPS he 'was never involved in the arms  trade' - arms control advocates like Oxfam say the case is  of importance precisely because Bout was such a major  player.  According to spokesperson Louis Belanger, 'If he is  convicted, Oxfam will be pleased that the world will become  a less dangerous place, as someone who seems to have been  one of the biggest arms dealers of the past 20 years can no  longer ply his trade. ' 	 Despite the outcome of the trial in New York, the  international community still lacks a binding agreement on  the global arms trade. The United Nations has attempted to address the matter of  arms trade in various ways, notably with the adoption by the  General Assembly in 2001 of the U. N.  Protocol against the  Illicit Manufacturing of and Trafficking in Firearms, Their  Parts and Components and Ammunition, known as the Firearms  Protocol. The U. N.  also established a Programme of Action (PoA) to  Prevent, Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small  Arms and Light Weapons in All Its Aspects.  But, as Stedjan says, the PoA is not binding and is  incomplete.  'The Firearms Protocol is on stopping illicit  manufacturing and trafficking of a certain weapon.  It is not  about regulating the legal trade,' he said, adding, 'Small  arms is only a small subset of the arms trade. 'Since 2003, Oxfam has partnered with Amnesty International  and the International Action Network on Small Arms (IANSA)  in their Control Arms Campaign.  The goal is to see the  international community adopt a legally binding Arms Trade  Treaty (ATT), which 'would regulate everything from large  ships to tanks to small arms', said Stedjan.  If the strongly-worded version of the ATT is adopted as  Oxfam hopes, he says it would 'require all states to adopt  national laws that would criminalise the transfer of weapons  outside the authority of a government. 'At the same time, the treaty would 'create global standards  that would prevent arms from being used to violate human  rights, international humanitarian law, and undermine  development. 'In Bout's case, such a treaty would have hampered his  activities, since 'Mr.  Bout is accused of selling weapons  without the authority of a state to a non-state actor.  So  neither the importing or exporting state is involved in a  transfer,' Stedjan explained. 'Under the ATT, that would be illegal and require states to  arrest him… The United States would not have been forced to  do a sting operation and transport him to New York.   Countries where Bout was operating would hold him  accountable,' he said. 'Right now, in many countries, that behaviour is not  illegal,' Stedjan stressed. Even more troubling, he said, is the fact that, 'Many  countries are hesitant to sign an agreement that would  govern how they address national security concerns.  So while  the need is clear, many countries do not want to be held  accountable to the global community for arms transfers and  do not want to tie their own hands. 'This is one of the key reasons why the ATT has been off the  international community's agenda for a long time.  In 2006,  153 governments voted in the U. N.  General Assembly to begin  working on an ATT, but it was not until November 2009 that a  timetable was set. Now, an ATT is anticipated to be adopted in 2012, following  four preparatory committees, the second of which will take  place at the end of next month in New York. Despite the slow pace of negotiations, Stedjan is hopeful:  'It will be hard but I think the question is no longer  whether there will be a binding treaty, but how strong the  treaty will be. ' 