Besieged Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak, a former air force  officer whose 30-year old authoritarian regime is under  attack, presides over a country described as one of the major  military powers in the region,  ranking next to Israel and  Turkey. Since it signed the U. S. -brokered Camp David Peace Treaty  with Israel back in September 1978, Egypt has been the  recipient of billions of dollars in U. S.  military equipment,  including state-of-the art fighter planes, warships,  missiles, battle tanks and electronic equipment. If the Mubarak regime collapses, will all this U. S.   equipment fall into the 'wrong hands'?Stephen Zunes, professor of politics and chair of Middle  Eastern Studies at the University of San Francisco, told IPS  the pro-democracy protests are primarily led by young people  who are not only alienated from the ruling regime, but also  from the traditional Islamist opposition and the aging  Muslim Brotherhood leadership as well. As a result, he said, the United States probably shouldn't  worry about a radical Islamist regime coming to power. 'It should also be noted, however, that a truly democratic  government in Egypt would not likely be as willing as  Mubarak to do the bidding of Washington or the International  Monetary Fund (IMF),' said Zunes, who has written  extensively on Middle Eastern politics. The weapons in the Egyptian military arsenal include F-16  fighter planes, attack helicopters, frigates, advanced  Sidewinder and Hellfire missiles and Abrams battle tanks -  purchased mostly with U. S.  Foreign Military Financing (FMF). The billions of dollars in U. S.  aid to Egypt via FMF has  remained gratis, says Dan Darling, Europe & Middle East  Military Markets Analyst at Forecast International Inc. , a  U. S. -based defence market research firm. Egypt was designated a major non-NATO (North Atlantic Treaty  Organisation) ally by the United States in 1989 under the  administration of President George H. W.  Bush. Among other things, Darling told IPS, this status allows  Cairo access to more sophisticated U. S.  weaponry and opens  the door for entry into cooperative research and development  projects alongside the United States.  Since then, there have been attempts by the U. S.  Congress to  curtail levels of military aid to Egypt for reasons of  emphasising democratic reforms or stifling the flow of  weapons-smuggling by Hamas via tunnels between Egypt and  Gaza, he pointed out. 'These attempts have largely come to nothing,' said Darling.   Instead, the tap has been maintained as Egypt has stuck to  the parametres of the Camp David Accords. From 2004 through 2010, the level of annual FMF has remained  consistent at 1. 3 billion dollars or just slightly below,  and the Pentagon request for 2011 maintains this level. This figure is likely to remain intact through the medium- term future - barring extreme political shocks, such as a  Muslim Brotherhood/Islamist takeover in Cairo or an  abrogation of the Camp David Accords by Egypt, he added.  Zunes told IPS there has never been a legitimate defence  rationale for U. S.  military aid to Egypt. 'This security assistance is largely designed for internal  repression to prevent democratic change and to keep the  Mubarak dictatorship in power,' he declared. Prior to the Camp David peace treaty, Egypt was a longtime  recipient of Soviet weaponry under a Treaty of Friendship  and Cooperation with Moscow.  The Aswan Dam, a major economic  showpiece, was built with financial assistance from the then  Soviet Union. But with the Camp David accord, Egypt switched its political  and military loyalties from the Soviet Union to the United  States. Still, Egypt remains in the process of steadily weaning  itself off former Soviet legacy hardware; prior to 1978 the  Egyptian Army was largely equipped with Soviet weaponry. Darling said the Egyptian military still has healthy amounts  of Soviet-/Russian-designed hardware, but its last orders  came during the 2001-05 period when it agreed to purchase  400 million dollars in Russian arms. Currently, the United States is the overwhelming arms  supplier to Egypt, providing it with 85 percent of its  weaponry between 2001 and 2008, and 86 percent from 2002 to  2009, he added.  In terms of conventional size and capabilities, said  Darling, Egypt has one of the strongest militaries in the  Middle East, behind Israel and Turkey and ahead of Iran in  terms of advanced firepower - air and sea power,  armoured/mechanised capabilities. However, it remains a relatively static heavy military force  focused on defence of the Sinai and matching the Israel  Defence Forces (IDF), rather reforming itself into the type  of flexible, quick reaction forces being emphasised by NATO  militaries - the type which can undertake multiple tasks and  combat multiple threats, be they non-state actors (Hamas),  sub-state actors (Hezbollah), transnational terrorist  groups, crisis relief efforts, or combating piracy on the  high seas or littoral areas, declared Darling.  