When Major General Mohamed Said Elassar, assistant to Mohammed  Hussein Tantawi, the Egyptian minister of defence, came to the  U. S.  capital last April, he was given the equivalent of a red  carpet welcome.  The delegation of high-ranking Egyptian  military officials that he was leading was ushered from one  Congressional office to the next, from the Pentagon to the  State Department. His host was Bob Livingston, a former chairman of the  appropriations committee in the U. S.  House of  Representatives.  On hand to accompany him to meetings with  the military was William Miner, a retired Navy pilot with a  master's degree in Middle East affairs from the Naval Post  Graduate School.  Cathryn Kingsbury, a former employee of the  Ronald Reagan Presidential Library and Center for Public  Affairs, an Arabic speaker who had lived in Egypt, took the  delegation to Congress on Apr.  29. Kingsbury, Livingston and Miner were lobbyists employed by  the government of Egypt, helping them to open doors to  senior officers in the U. S.  government.  Records of their  meetings, required under law, were recently published by the  Sunlight Foundation, a Washington watchdog group. 'Many of the meetings with lawmakers were with lawmakers  with seats on powerful committees including the panel in  charge of foreign aid spending.  Lobbyists contacted six of  the fourteen members of the Subcommittee on State, Foreign  Operations Appropriations,' wrote Paul Blumenthal, a  Sunlight researcher.  In addition, Livingston and Miner  traveled to Cairo to meet with the U. S.  embassy there to  discuss 'U. S. /Egyptian security issues'. Indeed Egypt has received over 70 billion dollars in  economic and military aid from the U. S.  Congress in the past  60 years, according to numbers compiled by the Congressional  Research Service. Specifically, the aid money pays for U. S. -designed Abrams  tanks assembled in suburban Cairo under contract with  General Dynamics.  Boeing sells Egypt CH-47 Chinook transport  helicopters, Lockheed Martin sells F-16s fighter jets,  Sikorsky Aircraft sells Black Hawk helicopters.  Lockheed  Martin has taken in 3. 8 billion dollars from Egypt in the  last few years, General Dynamics 2. 5 billion dollars, Boeing  1. 7 billion dollars, among many others. The Livingston Group made the largest number of contacts  with the U. S.  government for the Egyptians to make sure that  this money continued to flow, but they were not the only  ones.  Tony Podesta, the brother of a former White House  chief of staff, and Toby Moffett, a former Democratic  Congressman, joined forces with Livingston to create the PLM  Group to represent Egypt in Washington, according to  foreign-agent records at the Justice Department.  Sunlight  records show that the joint venture was paid 1. 1 million  dollars a year. When contacted by IPS, the Livingston Group lobbyists  declined to discuss the exact nature of their support for  the Egyptian government, referring enquiries to Karim  Haggag, the spokesman for the Egyptian embassy in  Washington, who did not return repeated phone calls. Nor is PLM the only Washington lobbyist for the Egyptian  government.  Frank Wisner, the former U. S.  ambassador that  President Barack Obama dispatched to Cairo earlier this week  to advise President Hosni Mubarak, is employed by Patton  Boggs, a law firm and registered lobbyist.  On its website  Patton Boggs summarises the contracts that it has won in the  last 20 years to advise the Egyptian military, leading  'commercial families in Egypt' as well as 'manage contractor  disputes in military sales agreements arising under the US  Foreign Military Sales Act. 'Wisner, a former ambassador to Egypt from 1986 to 1991, sits  on the board of the Pharaonic American Life Insurance  Company (ALICO) in Egypt as well as the American University  in Cairo. The diplomatic cables published by Wikileaks provide a  further glimpse into some of the benefits that the  diplomatic lobbying has won the Egyptian government, notably  the provision of specialised military training paid for by  the U. S.  government. Under the 'Leahy law' - a human rights requirement named  after Senator Patrick Leahy of Vermont that prohibits U. S.   military assistance to foreign military units that violate  human rights - U. S.  embassies have to vouch for all  prospective trainees. One cable from the U. S.  embassy dated Oct.  21, 2009, lists  dozens of members of a variety of Egyptian security offices  from 'Central Security' and 'Public Security' to 'Civil  Defense' and 'Police Academy' that have been cleared to take  U. S.  sponsored anti-terrorism classes abroad.  Another cable  dated Jan.  13, 2010 that has been made public by Wikileaks  offered 'Security Sector Central' officers three-week  courses in how to handle explosives. The courtship between Washington and Cairo continues to this  day.  Even as the Egyptian protestors were facing off against  the tear gas grenades being lobbed by security forces in  Cairo last week, another delegation of Egyptian senior  military officials led by Lieutenant General Sami Hafez  Enan, the chief of staff of Egypt's armed forces, arrived in  Washington to meet with Admiral Mike Mullen, the chairman of  the Joint Chiefs of Staff.  (No public records have been  filed yet so it is unclear if the PLM group was escorting  them around again. )The most tangible outcome of this lobbying is the weapons  sales and military training authorised by the U. S.  Congress  and subsidised by the U. S.  taxpayer.  But the relationship  between Cairo and Washington is much deeper and wider. Another diplomatic memo written on May 14, 2006 released by  Wikileaks makes it clear that the U. S.  government is working  closely with Egyptian spy chief Omar Suleiman on key  regional matters such as figuring out how best to  marginalise Hamas in Palestine: '(O)ur intelligence  collaboration with Omar Soliman, who is expected in  Washington next week, is now probably the most successful  element of the relationship. 'The diplomatic memo, which was written by Francis J.   Ricciardone, Jr.  (then U. S.  ambassador to Egypt) to brief  Robert Zoellick (then Deputy Secretary of State) who was  visiting Cairo at the time, notes that 'Omar Soliman also  told us he would be glad to see you (Zoellick), if schedules  permit - he will be working the Israeli and PA delegations  in Sharm' - referring to a meeting being held in the  Egyptian resort town of Sharm-el-Sheikh. Suleiman was described by New Yorker writer Jane Mayer in  her book 'The Dark Side' as 'the C. I. A. 's point man in Egypt  for renditions - the covert programme in which the C. I. A.   snatched terror suspects from around the world and returned  them to Egypt and elsewhere for interrogation, often under  brutal circumstances. 'This week, Mubarak was lobbied furiously by Frank Wisner and  other diplomats in the Obama administration, according to  the New York Times, to resign and appoint Suleiman to take  over as interim president in Cairo.  Enan and Tantawi, the  employers of the Washington lobbyists, have been put forward  by Washington to lead a process of constitutional reform. If the protestors do not succeed in ousting this cosy group  of diplomats, former members of Congress and high-ranking  Egyptian government officials, the game of musical chairs  may simply move the players from one seat to the next.   Suleiman will replace Mubarak and the military delegations  will resume their rounds in Congress, the State department  and the Pentagon, accompanied by their Washington lobbyists. *Pratap Chatterjee is a visiting fellow at the Center for  American Progress in Washington DC specializing in fraud,  waste and abuse in government procurement. 