The central justification of the U. S. -NATO war against the  Afghan Taliban - that the Taliban would allow al Qaeda to  return to Afghanistan - has been challenged by new historical  evidence of offers by the Taliban leadership to reconcile with  the Hamid Karzai government after the fall of the Taliban  government in late 2001. The evidence of the Taliban peace initiatives comes from a  new paper drawn from the first book-length study of Taliban- al Qaeda relations thus far, as well as an account in  another recent study on the Taliban in Kandahar province by  journalist Anand Gopal. In a paper published Monday by the Center on International  Cooperation at New York University, Alex Strick van  Linschoten and Felix Kuehn recount the decision by the  Taliban leadership in 2002 to offer political reconciliation  with the U. S. -backed Afghan administration. Citing an unidentified former Taliban official who  participated in the decision, they report that the entire  senior Taliban political leadership met in Pakistan in  November 2002 to consider an offer of reconciliation with  the new Afghan government in which they would 'join the  political process' in Afghanistan.  'We discussed whether to join the political process in  Afghanistan or not and we took a decision that, yes, we  should go and join the process,' the former Taliban leader  told the co-authors. They cite an interlocutor who was then in contact with the  Taliban leadership as recalling that they would have  returned to Afghanistan to participate in the political  system if they had been given an assurance they would not be  arrested. But the Karzai government and the United States refused to  offer such an assurance, the interlocutor recalled.  They  considered the Taliban a 'spent force', he told Strick van  Linschoten and Kuehn. Gopal, who has covered Afghanistan for the Christian Science  Monitor and the Wall Street Journal, provided a similar  account of the Taliban attempt to reconcile with the Karzai  government in a lengthy study published by the New America  Foundation last November, based on his interviews with  present and former Taliban as well as with officials in the  office of President Karzai. The entire senior Taliban leadership, meeting in Karachi,  'agreed in principle to find a way for them to return to  Afghanistan and abandon the fight', Gopal wrote, but the  initiative was frustrated by the unwillingness of the United  States and the Afghan government to provide any assurance  that they would not arrested and detained.  The Taliban continued to pursue the possibility of  reconciliation in subsequent years, with apparent interest  on the part of the Karzai government, according to Gopal.   Delegations 'representing large sections of the Taliban  leadership' traveled to Kabul in both 2003 and 2004 to meet  with senior government officials, according to his account. But the George W.  Bush administration remained uninterested  in offering assurances of security to the Taliban.  Robert Grenier, then the CIA station chief in Islamabad,  revealed in an article in al Jazeera Jan.  31, 2010 that  former Taliban foreign minister Wakil Ahmed Muttawakil had  been serving as an intermediary with the Taliban on their  possible return to Afghanistan in 2002 when he was 'arrested  and imprisoned for his pains'.  The CIA sought to persuade the U. S.  Defence Department to  release Muttawakil, according to Grenier.  But Muttawakil  remained in detention at Bagram Airbase, where he was  physically abused, until October 2003. The new evidence undermines the Barack Obama  administration's claim that Taliban-ruled areas of  Afghanistan would become a 'sanctuary' for al Qaeda. Strick van Linschoten and Kuehn suggest that the proposed  reintegration of the Taliban into a political system that  had been set up by the United States and its allies was  'totally alien to al-Qaeda ideology but logical for the  Taliban'. They acknowledge that the Taliban have welcomed the support  and assistance of al Qaeda cadres in the war.  But they argue  in the new paper that the relationship is a 'marriage of  convenience' imposed by the foreign military presence, not  an expression of an ideological alliance.  They also cite evidence that the Taliban leadership  recognise that they will have to provide guarantees that a  Taliban-influenced regime in Afghanistan would not allow al  Qaeda to have a sanctuary.  They note in particular a Taliban public statement released  before the London Conference of January 2010 that pledged,  'We will not allow our soil to be used against any other  country. 'An earlier Taliban statement, distributed to news media Dec.   4, 2009, said the 'Islamic Emirate of Afghanistan' - the  term used by the insurgent leadership to refer to the  organisation - had 'no agenda of meddling in the internal  affairs of other countries and is ready to give legal  guarantees if foreign forces withdraw from Afghanistan'. Independent specialists on the history of the relationship  have long questioned that assumption, and have emphasised  that the Taliban leadership was never very close to al  Qaeda. Leah Farrell, senior counter-terrorism intelligence analyst  with the Australian Federal Police from 2002 to 2008, wrote  in her blog that the relationship 'is not a marriage, it's  friends with benefits'.  Farrell has also said that jihadi  accounts of the late 1990s have shown bin Laden was not that  close to Taliban spiritual leader Mullah Mohammed Omar  before the 9/11 attacks.  The new paper, based on both Taliban and jihadist documents  and from interviews with Taliban and former Taliban  officials, points to basic differences of ideology and  interest between the Taliban and al Qaeda throughout the  history of their relations.  Relations between Taliban and al Qaeda leaders during the  second half of the 1990s were 'complicated and often tense',  according to Strick von Linschoten and Kuehn, even though  they were both Sunni Muslims and shared a common enemy.  They recall that al Qaeda leader Osama bin Laden's plotting  against the United States was done in direct violation of  Mullah Omar's directives to him. An e-mail from two leading Arab jihadists in Afghanistan to  bin Laden in July 1999, which Wall Street Journal reporter  Alan Cullison later found in a laptop that had once belonged  to al Qaeda, referred to a 'crisis' in relations between bin  Laden and Mullah Omar that threatened the future of al  Qaeda-sponsored training camps in Afghanistan.  The message  expressed fear that the Taliban regime might 'kick them out'  of Afghanistan.  Mullah Omar nevertheless regarded bin Laden as an 'important  connector' to the Muslim world, according to Strick van  Linschoten and Kuehn.  And the Taliban leadership faction  that was pushing hard to force bin Laden out of the country  was weakened by the death of its leading figure, Mullah  Mohammed Rabbani, in April 2001. Contrary to the suggestion that the Taliban were complicit  with the Sep.  11, 2001 attacks, however, Strick van  Linschoten and Kuehn assert that Mullah Omar and other  leaders refused to hand over bin Laden to the United States  mainly because of the fear of losing the few allies they had  in the Muslim world.  They suggest that a primary reason for the Taliban decision  not to give into U. S.  pressure on bin Laden both before and  after 9/11 was to maintain the support of Pakistan, which  was encouraging them to hold out against those pressures.  Other published sources have confirmed that, even in October  2001, Pakistani intelligence officials were advising the  Taliban to avoid handing over bin Laden, in the hope that  the Taliban-al Qaeda resistance to the U. S. -led military  offensive would continue.  *Gareth Porter is an investigative historian and journalist  specialising in U. S.  national security policy.  The paperback  edition of his latest book, 'Perils of Dominance: Imbalance  of Power and the Road to War in Vietnam', was published in  2006. 