Wafaa Bilal hasn't had a decent night's sleep in about two  months.  After becoming the first person to have a camera  surgically implanted into the back of his head, the Iraqi- American artist is learning the hard way just how much of a  headache modern technology can be. 'It's still painful,' he tells IPS, pointing to the three  titanium bolts that have been inserted into his cranium to  hold the camera in place. Bilal undertook the dramatic operation as part of a year- long project entitled 3rdi.  The camera takes photographs  every minute of the view behind Bilal's head.  The images,  comprising everything from uninspiring shots of his kitchen  cupboards to unnerving angles of objects and passers-by, are  then uploaded onto the 3rdi website and streamed to Qatar's  newly inaugurated contemporary art museum, Mathaf. 3rdi is, in many ways, a reflection of Bilal's own traumatic  experiences of loss.  Having been raised in a conservative  family under Saddam Hussein's tyrannical rule, the soft- spoken artist was forced to flee during the Iraqi invasion  of Kuwait after publicly rejecting his conscription into the  army.  He spent two years living in a makeshift refugee camp  in the Saudi Arabian desert before being granted asylum in  the United States. 'It was one of the toughest experiences of my life,' recalls  Bilal, who is also an assistant professor of photography at  New York University's Tisch School of The Arts.  In the camp,  'We were subjected to very harsh treatment by Saudi soldiers  and many people lost their lives.  Art became a way to remind  myself I was still alive. 'With little to remind him of the places and faces he had to  abandon so abruptly, 3rdi has become Bilal's way of  recording chaotic, poignant and yet often banal moments of  departure.  'Individually, they might not look significant,'  he says of the images, but when taken together, they form  'quite a nice mosaic of someone's life. 'Since unveiling the project, 3rdi has evolved to speak about  many other aspects of modern life, such as government  surveillance of its citizens (the camera tracks Bilal's  whereabouts via GPS) and the aggressive intrusion of  technology. 'There is no such thing as a private life anymore,' says  Bilal.  'Instead of creating something to serve us, these  machines have enslaved us. 'Although the camera's physical presence leaves the artist  susceptible to infection and sleepless nights, he insists  the pain is an integral part of the 3rdi project.   'Performance is about endurance,' he explains.  'It's a  physical reminder of what you are doing. 'It's not the first time Bilal has used his own body as his  canvas.  Physical intervention has been a central, and often  controversial, feature of much of his work. In 2010, Bilal held a 24-hour performance in which he had  the names of Iraqi cities tattooed on his back.  More than  100,000 dots marking Iraqi casualties were also tattooed on  with invisible ink, symbolising the anonymous victims of a  war that most Americans feel so far removed from.  Bilal also  has plans to tattoo on some 5,000 dots in homage to the U. S.   soldiers also killed in the U. S. -led war. For an earlier project, called 'Shoot an Iraqi/Domestic  Tension', Bilal confined himself in a prison-like cell for  30 days and was subjected to the whims of his audience, who  could shoot a remote-controlled paintball gun at him from  the internet or gallery.  Following newspaper articles about  the project, hackers infiltrated the software and programmed  the gun to shoot at Bilal once every minute. 'The hope is you build a platform not to engage those  already engaged in political dialogue,' but to attract those  who typically shy away, he says.  It seemed he succeeded in  that attempt: by the end of the exhibition, over 65,000  people from more than 130 countries had fired at Bilal. His work became more overtly political following the killing  of his younger brother by a U. S.  drone missile in Iraq in  2004.  Bilal says he wanted to bring people living in 'the  comfort zone' into the realm of the 'conflict zone', Iraq. With that goal in mind, the artist has also subjected  himself to water boarding, the simulated-drowning torture  technique former U. S.  president George W.  Bush notoriously  admitted to using in Iraq. 'My work is driven from within as a concerned person, as  someone who has been directly affected by his surroundings,'  Bilal says.  'My job has to become a mirror to reflect that  social condition. 'It may be another 10 months before Bilal can enjoy a proper  night's rest again, but if having eyes at the back of his  head has taught the artist anything, it is to savour the  present more. 'Most of the time we don't exist in the present, and I think  in the process we fail to exist in the place we are in,' he  says.  'I think this is a call to slow down, look at these  corners of our lives and live in the moment we are in. '3rdi is online until December 2011. 