Amid renewed pockets of unrest throughout Sudan and continuing  violence in Darfur, government officials in Khartoum announced  Monday that a whopping 98. 83 percent of southern voters —  numbering more than 3. 8 million in a country of over 42. 3  million — cast their ballots in favour of secession during  last month's highly anticipated referendum. The results were received positively by Sudanese President  Omar Hassan al-Bashir — a seemingly encouraging sign for the  country's potential normalisation of relations with the  international community.  '[W]e accept and welcome these results because they  represent the will of the southern people,' al-Bashir, who  is under indictment by the International Criminal Court for  genocide, war crimes and crimes against humanity committed  in Darfur, said in an address aired on state television. 'Now, all parties have a responsibility to ensure that this  historic moment of promise becomes a moment of lasting  progress,' U. S.  President Barack Obama said in a statement  Monday.  With the successful completion of the referendum and al- Bashir's acceptance of the results, the road to peaceful  secession seems to be paved, but many contentious issues  remain unresolved. 'The peaceful conclusion of the southern Sudan referendum  for independence is an historic accomplishment, but recent  troubling events underscore the importance of continued U. S.   engagement in the north and the south,' said Amir Osman,  senior director for policy and government relations for the  Genocide Intervention Network/Save Darfur Coalition (GI- NET/SDC), in a statement Monday. Last week, seemingly inspired by the mass demonstrations of  Tunisia, Egypt and elsewhere, hundreds of restive Sudanese  youth took to the streets in protest of rising food and fuel  prices and human rights abuses.  Many were beaten, tear- gassed and arrested by police. And in the volatile region of north Darfur, which is in the  western part of the country, renewed fighting between  government and opposition groups have prompted thousands of  families to flee their villages, according to rights groups. 'The Comprehensive Peace Agreement must be fully implemented  and outstanding disputes must be resolved peacefully.  At the  same time, there must be an end to attacks on civilians in  Darfur and a definitive end to that conflict,' Obama said.  'For those who meet all of their obligations, there is a  path to greater prosperity and normal relations with the  United States, including examining Sudan's designation as a  State Sponsor of Terrorism,' Obama said.  With the stakes of the referendum so high — namely, the  threat of a recommenced civil war, which raged for over two  decades, took an estimated two million, mostly southern,  lives, and was finally halted by a Comprehensive Peace  Agreement (CPA) six years ago — Western policymakers have  incentivised the full implementation of the CPA. In seeming exchange for Khartoum's lawful and peaceful  compliance in allowing the embattled, resource-rich south to  break away if it so desired, a number of compelling carrots  are being dangled.  One of them is the promise to reconsider Sudan's  classification as a country that systematically supports  international terrorism.  As a result of this designation,  the eastern African nation is subject to a series of  restrictive sanctions. 'Removal of the State Sponsor of Terrorism designation will  take place if and when Sudan meets all criteria spelled out  in U. S.  law, including not supporting international  terrorism for the preceding six months and providing  assurance it will not support such acts in the future, and  fully implements the 2005 [CPA], including reaching a  political solution on Abyei [a contentious region bordering  Darfur, south Sudan and the rest of the country] and key  post-referendum arrangements,' added Secretary of State  Hillary Clinton in a separate statement. The Financial Times also reported Sunday that French and  U. S.  officials agreed to a summit to be hosted by the  African Union, in which a one-year deferral of al-Bashir's  ICC indictment would be considered. Any postponement would have to be mandated by the United  Nations Security Council and be made on the grounds that a  delay is required to preserve international peace and  security, according to article 16 of the Rome Statute, which  established the ICC.  Rights groups argue that suspension sets a dangerous  precedent, threatens the Council's credibility, and robs  victims and their families who have been subjected to  heinous crimes of potential justice. 'A deferral of the ICC's judicial role risks denying redress  to the victims of horrific abuses and must be invoked with  extreme caution,' three Human Rights Watch officials wrote  in a letter to the U. N.  Security Council in September 2008,  amidst a diplomatic campaign by Khartoum for an article 16  delay for al-Bashir, whose warrant was requested that year  and issued the following spring. 'Khartoum has time and again made commitments to Security  Council members and the international community that have  proven to be worthless,' they said at the time. With the CPA set to expire in July of this year, pressure is  mounting on all parties to comply fully for a peaceful  transition. 