'Security Sector Reforms' (SSRs) have become the latest catch  phrase in donor discussions on post-conflict peacebuilding  around the world. But instead of taking a one-size-fits-all approach in  diverse countries like Afghanistan, Haiti, Iraq and Somalia,  SSRs should include an 'openness towards non-Western  approaches', says security and defence expert  Bjørn Møller  from the Danish Institute for International Studies (DIIS).  In an interview with IPS, Møller notes that this means  involving local communities as well as dealing with former  combatants who earned their living through the gun,  destroying remaining arsenals of weapons, and reforming  power structures.  Excerpts from the interview follow. Q: What type of security are we are talking about as far as  SSRs are concerned?   A: Mainly the security of the state - i. e.  'national  security' - vis-a-vis internal enemies such as insurgents,  but also the human security of the inhabitants.  The most  important part of SSR may be DDR, i. e.  the disarmament,  demobilisation and reintegration of former combatants, but  insuring civil and democratic control of the military and  police are also very important. In the case of negotiated ceasefires and peace agreements,  SSR often also includes provision for the co-optation of  parts of the rebel forces in reformed national security  forces, which also provides some security for the disarming  of rebel forces. Q: How does a lack of security particularly affect people  living in poverty?  A: The poor people are those who are least able to escape or  defend themselves against the consequences of civil wars.   The more affluent people can often flee or hire armed  protection. Q: To what extent are SSRs important to build structures of  lasting peace, and what can they achieve compared to other  peacebuilding instruments?  A: The DDR element of SSR is the most important.  In the  immediate aftermath of a civil war, what matters most after  the signing of a peace is to give the former combatants  something better to do than fighting.  Otherwise they may  resort to violent crime, start a new war or join one in a  neighbouring country - as we have seen in West Africa where  the same fighters have fought in Liberia, Sierra Leone and  Côte d'Ivoire. Q: SSRs became an appealing buzzword in international policy  making.  Why is this idea so attractive for donor countries?  A: It came along with a new emphasis on post-conflict  peacebuilding and as an integral part of the latter.  It  could thus be seen as a means to prevent second rounds of  armed conflicts. Q: You raised key conceptual concerns when SSRs are applied  to African countries.  Can you explain further?  A: The West - which is usually 'calling the shots' because  it is paying the bill - finds it very hard to think beyond  its own experience.  It therefore seeks to establish a 'state  monopoly on the legitimate use of force', which the German  sociologist Max Weber found to be the distinguishing feature  of the modern state. In Europe, establishing such a monopoly took several  centuries, and to expect a non-Western country coming out of  a civil war to accomplish the same in, at most, a couple of  years is quite unrealistic.  Q: Despite the fact, which you have mentioned, that the SSR  concept is premised on Western notions and experiences, it  is applied to countries in all regions of the world.  What  are the implications for effective policy making and the  affected people?  A: First of all, a lot of effort is wasted with, for  instance, training of 'national' security forces before the  confrontation is really over, and a large part of these  forces may simply 'disappear' shortly after the completion  of their training, perhaps because they join the remaining  rebels - now better trained and even armed than they were  before, as we have seen in, for instance, Somalia, Iraq and  Afghanistan. Secondly, institutions for collective self-protection of  villages, tribes or other communities are often dismantled  because they do not seem compatible with a state monopoly on  the use of force. Q: What are the challenges to meet?  A: This all depends on the concrete circumstances, which  differ from setting to setting.  There is no 'one size fits  all' SSR formula.  It is also important to have enough time,  but the external actors, both states and international  organisations, are almost always looking for an exit option  - often defined as the completion of a superficial SSR  programme and the holding of elections.  Q: Are there policy complements which could improve the  concept? How about alternative approaches?  A: There is a need for openness towards non-Western  approaches to the provision of security.  In religiously  divided societies, for instance, there may be a need for a  more pluralistic legal order, i. e.  for a coexistence of  secular and religious or Christian and Islamic legal orders.   This is hard to reconcile with the Western ideals, but may  appear as more legitimate to the local population. It may also be important to provide scope for local and  community-based security forces, simply because they may  appear more legitimate.  In fact, legitimacy is usually far  more important than professional skills, but this is  something that cannot be taught. It is also important to realise that the West is very often  mistrusted - and not without reasons - and its values not  necessarily shared by the local population.  Hence, the more  the West does to help, even with the best of intensions, the  more it may inadvertently undermine the legitimacy of the  post-conflict state and its security forces. 