When embattled Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak reluctantly  called it quits after more than two weeks of mass  demonstrations against his 30-year-old authoritarian regime,  he temporarily turned over the country to an institution  trained, armed and nurtured by the United States: the 350,000- strong military. 'Mubarak was essentially a military man sustained by the  military,' says an Arab diplomat, 'So it's not surprising he  expects the armed forces to take a commanding role. 'Egypt's formidable ground forces also include an additional  300,000-strong security force, including the National Guard,  Frontier Corps, Coast Guard and the paramilitary units of  the Ministry of Interior, plus an estimated 320,000 in army  reserves. The hefty 35 billion dollars in gratis military aid to Egypt  over the last 32 years - under the U. S.  Foreign Military  Financing (FMF) and International Military Education and  Training (IMET) programmes - was lavishly bestowed on the  armed forces which sustained and protected the Mubarak  regime since October 1981. The State Department describes FMF, currently at 1. 3 billion  dollars annually, as 'the backbone' of Egypt's military  procurement budget. According to the latest 2011 Congressional Budget  Justification for Foreign Operations released by the State  Department, U. S.  aid to Egypt includes funding for  international narcotics control and law enforcement; non- proliferation, anti-terrorism and de-mining; combating  weapons of mass destruction; counter-terrorism and security  sector reforms. Over the past decade, about 85 percent of the arms in  Egypt's military arsenal originated in the United States,  says Dan Darling, Europe and Middle East Military Markets  Analyst at Forecast International, a U. S.  based defence  market research firm. The U. S.  assistance, however, came with a condition attached  to it, ensuring that virtually all of those funds be  ploughed back into the U. S.  economy, according to the State  Department. The funds could be utilised only to purchase U. S.  equipment,  thereby indirectly subsidising the U. S.  defence industry,  one of the most powerful political lobbies in the United  States. The U. S.  aid agreement, both with Egypt and Israel, was an  integral part of the historic 1979 peace treaty following  the 1978 U. S. -brokered Camp David peace accords. While the Egyptians were hamstrung, the Israelis were not. After strong lobbying by the Israeli government, the United  States granted an exception to the Jewish state: it could  use a sizeable part of the U. S.  funds to buy equipment made  in Israel. For Egypt it was a 'one-way street', Pieter Wezeman, senior  researcher in the Arms Transfers Programme at the Stockholm  International Peace Research Institute (SIPRI), told IPS. But for Israel, it was a 'two-way street,' he noted. Currently, Israel receives between 2. 5 billion and 3. 0  billion dollars in non-repayable U. S.  military aid annually  - more than twice the allocation earmarked for Egypt. Darling pointed out that under the current arrangement,  Israel is allowed to spend up to about 25 percent of U. S.   military aid on Israeli manufactured arms and support  equipment, which would come out to 750,000 dollars annually. 'Israel is, I believe, the only country granted this  exception regarding U. S.  Foreign Military Financing,'  Darling told IPS.  This is granted by Washington in recognition of the amount  of arms Israel buys from the U. S.  and the small Israeli  domestic market for weaponry. Because of its small home market, Israeli defence  industrials must look abroad to the export market for  revenue, he said. Thus Washington's exemption of a quarter of its FMF to  Israel is an acknowledgement of Israeli concerns towards the  need to grow and sustain their own indigenous defence  industry, Darling pointed out. The administration of President Barack Obama, which has  welcomed Mubarak's decision to step down, has to cautiously  navigate the role the military will play in the future of a  democratic Egypt. When Mubarak remained adamant, refusing to quit last week,  there were demands that Washington should cut off aid to  Egypt.  But that's unlikely to happen then - and even in the  future, particularly if the military decides to hijack the  democratic process. 'If the U. S.  cuts off military aid to Egypt,' says one  defence analyst, 'it will be like cutting off one's nose to  spite one's face. 'According to arms sales notifications compiled by the U. S.   Defence Security Assistance Agency, and cited by William  Hartung, director of Arms and Security Initiative at the New  America Foundation, the U. S.  Defence Department has brokered  over 11. 0 billion dollars in arms sales to Egypt over the  last decade. The U. S.  suppliers include Lockheed Martin, General  Dynamics, Boeing, Raytheon, United Defence and General  Electric - most of them described as powerful constituents  of U. S.  senators and congressmen. If the United States reconsiders aid to Egypt at any given  time, 'it is possible this gravy train for contractors could  come to an end,' says Hartung. But judging by multi-million dollars arms deals between  Egypt and U. S.  defence contractors, it is very unlikely  there will be a cutoff. According to reports out of Washington, the pro-Israel lobby  is also opposed to any cuts in U. S.  military aid to Egypt -  which has been liaising closely with the Israelis since the  1989 peace treaty. SIPRI's Wezeman told IPS: 'Yes, Israel has a very special  relationship with the United States, which is also reflected  in the U. S.  military aid to Israel. ''Not only can Israel spend part of the Foreign Military  Funds (FMF) on Israeli produced equipment, but as far as I  know, although I do not know the details, it can also get  offsets for arms it buys in the United States with FMF  funds,'  he noted. Under this arrangement, Israel can ask U. S.  companies to  procure items or set up production lines, for the  manufacture of components, in Israel for a certain  percentage of the price Israel pays for weapons bought from  these companies. Furthermore, he said, Israeli companies have managed to sell  their products in the U. S.  market.  And for several Israeli  companies, the U. S.  military is one of their largest  clients. Arms supplies to Egypt are a one-way street, which is  standard practice for FMF. 'I do not think Egypt has managed to sell much to the United  States,' said Wezeman. 