Despite evidence that the Taliban insurgency had grown  significantly in 2010, the U. S.  intelligence community failed  to revise its estimate for Taliban forces as part of a  National Intelligence Estimate (NIE) on Afghanistan in  December. That unusual decision was in deference to Gen.  David  Petraeus, commander of U. S. -NATO forces in Afghanistan, who  did not want any official estimate of the insurgency's  strength that would contradict his claims of success by  Special Operations Forces in reducing the capabilities of  the Taliban in 2010. In late 2009, the intelligence community adopted an estimate  of 20,000 to 30,000 full-time insurgents, as reported by  McClatchy newspapers in November and confirmed in a press  briefing by Brig.  Gen.  Eric Tremblay, a spokesman for the  International Security Assistance Force (ISAF), on Dec.  3,  2009. But in 2010, the Taliban and their allies increased the  total number of attacks to 34,000, compared with 22,000 in  2009, according to official ISAF data — a whopping 54  percent rise.  That major step-up in operations suggested that the Taliban  had grown substantially between 2009 and 2010.  Yet no  revised intelligence estimate of Taliban strength appeared  in late 2010, even though the National Intelligence Council  produced a National Intelligence Estimate on Afghanistan in  December.  Such an NIE would normally be expected to include  an updated estimate of insurgent strength.  Last month, officials of NATO and Petraeus's command managed  to suggest that the number of insurgents had not grown in  2010 and then dismissed the very idea of an intelligence  estimate of the size of the forces fighting against ISAF.  On Jan 3, 2011, an unnamed NATO official in Brussels said  there were 'up to 25,000' Taliban insurgents in Afghanistan,  according to a Jan.  6 story by Associated Press reporter  Slobodan Lekic.  The same 25,000 figure - the mid-point in  the 2009 estimate - had been provided earlier by 'several  military officers and diplomats', according to the Lekic  story.  That figure would imply that the number of full-time Taliban  had not grown since 2009, and might even have shrunk - thus  supporting Petraeus's claims of success. But in a Jan.  9 response to a query from Associated Press,  NATO spokeswoman Oana Lungescu clearly disparaged the idea  that there could be an official estimate of the Taliban  strength.  'There has never been a single reliable source for  the size of the insurgency,' said Lungescu, adding that all  estimates of the insurgents are 'highly unreliable'.  Lungescu sought to divert attention away from a focus on the  numerical strength of the Taliban, suggesting that it  'misrepresents gains made by alliance forces in the past  year'.  But it is logically impossible for a numerical  estimate of insurgent strength to 'misrepresent' the results  of military operations. Lungescu was implying that an estimate of Taliban numerical  strength would interfere with ISAF's claims of having  weakened the Taliban.  In an obvious effort to suggest that the insurgency had been  reduced in size, Lungescu said,'[T]housands of insurgent  leaders have been killed or captured and several thousand  fighters have been taken off the battlefield. 'In response to an IPS query to ISAF about the estimated  strength of the Afghan armed insurgency, an ISAF spokesman,  U. S.  Navy Lt.  Fernando Rivero, did not respond except to  refer to the Jan.  9 statement by Lungescu.  An Afghan Defence Ministry spokesman said Feb.  9 that the  ministry estimates the number of Taliban insurgents at  between 25,000 and 35,000, although he said it was 'just a  guess'.  The failure of the intelligence community to adopt a revised  estimate in the NIE last year was shaped by a highly  politicised relationship between the intelligence community  and the most powerful field commander in modern U. S.   warfare.  The NIE reflected an agreement on what one intelligence  source called a 'division of labour' between the NIE and the  military under which the NIE would not deal with issues  bearing on the success of the U. S.  military effort in  Afghanistan.  Intelligence officials understood that such  issues were 'outside our lane', the source said.  An estimate of Taliban strength in the NIE would have  obvious bearing on the success of U. S.  military operations,  since it would show whether the Taliban had been able to  continue to grow despite losses inflicted by Special  Operations Forces raids. The decision to forego a formal estimate of insurgent forces  may have been authorised by the director of national  intelligence, James Clapper, who has oversight of any  national intelligence product, and adjudicates any major  differences of view that can't be negotiated.  Clapper, who  took over as DNI last August, has a reputation for  sacrificing truth to support existing war policies.  He is best known for having claimed in October 2003, when he  was director of the Defence Department's National Imagery  and Mapping Agency, that the missing WMD in Iraq  'unquestionably' had been transferred to Syria and other  countries before the March 2003 U. S.  invasion of Iraq. Dr.  Antonio Giustozzi of the London School of Economics, a  widely-published specialist on the conflict in Afghanistan,  told IPS the Afghan National Army had provided him with an  estimate in April 2010 of 36,000 full-time insurgents —  roughly a 50 percent increase over the 2009 estimate. Giustozzi provided IPS with his detailed estimate of  insurgent forces as of January 2011.  The estimate includes  36,000 full-time fighters and nearly 50,000 part-time local  fighters.  The Taliban only mobilise that much larger local  pool of manpower occasionally, according to Giustozzi.  That a revised estimate of the insurgency's strength is  missing from the latest NIE recalls the political struggle  between the CIA and the U. S.  military command over the  estimate of Vietnamese Communist-led military forces.  In late 1966, a CIA analyst, Sam Adams, found that the  military's estimate of less than 300,000 Communist-led  forces in Vietnam did not reflect the evidence of continued  growth in those forces — and particularly of 'irregular'  local paramilitary forces. The CIA came up with a new estimate of Communist-led forces  to 431,000 to 491,000, which was presented in a draft  national intelligence estimate in spring 1967.  But the  military command continued to stonewall, flatly refusing to  accept any increase in the overall Viet Cong 'order of  battle' above 300,000.  Gen.  Earle Wheeler, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff,  wrote to Gen.  William Westmoreland, the top U. S.  commander  in Vietnam, on Mar.  9, 1967, 'If these figures should reach  the public domain they would literally blow the lid off  Washington. ' Wheeler urged Westmoreland to 'do whatever is necessary to  insure [sic] that these figures are not repeat not released  to news media or otherwise exposed to the public. 'Westmoreland agreed.  According to his intelligence chief,  Gen.  Joseph A.  McChristian, Westmoreland said such an  estimate would be a 'political bombshell' if it got out to  the public.  CIA Director Richard Helms finally caved in to military  pressure in September 1967 and ordered the CIA to agree to  an estimate of exactly 299,000.  Former CIA analyst Ray McGovern told IPS he recalls Sam  Adams quoting in a conversation with him the explanation  Helms had given to Adams: 'My job is to protect the Agency,  and there is no way I can do that if I get into a pissing  match with the Army when it's at war. 'Like Westmoreland, Petraeus appears to have invoked the  privilege of the military commander to avert the potential  'political bombshell' of an estimate that would almost  certainly have shown a large increase in the number of armed  insurgents in Afghanistan. *Gareth Porter is an investigative historian and journalist  specialising in U. S.  national security policy.  The paperback  edition of his latest book, 'Perils of Dominance: Imbalance  of Power and the Road to War in Vietnam', was published in  2006. 