The rebel group that terrorised Ugandan civilians for more  than two decades, the Lord's Resistance Army (LRA), could  continue to haunt the people of Central Africa if the Ugandan  government fails to properly support demobilisation efforts,  according to a new report released Monday. Compiled by the Washington-based Enough Project, 'Too Far  From Home: Demobilizing the Lord's Resistance Army' tables  the many challenges facing ex-combatants attempting to lay  down their weapons, in what has become Africa's longest  running armed conflict. The report shows the Ugandan government is complicating  attempts to rehabilitate rebels by pressuring former  combatants to fight with the army, sometimes without pay,  and not adhering to the country's amnesty laws. Enough Project research director David Sullivan told IPS the  government needed to pursue a clear and coherent plan to  help LRA fighters reintegrate into Ugandan society. 'The problem is there's not an overarching strategy to  encourage fighters to give up their weapons,' Sullivan said. 'In fact some of the policies and behaviours of the Ugandan  army and government have been discouraging fighters from  coming home,' he added. 'Escaping from the LRA is very difficult and they're  punished if they do so.  Then, when they get home there are a  number of barriers; one is that they are often pressured  into joining the Ugandan army fighting against the LRA  without training or salary,' he said. 'The second issue is about amnesty.  Contrary to the law some  members of the LRA who did surrender are now being tried in  Uganda, which sends the wrong message to those in the field  who we're trying to get to come out. 'Originally from northern Uganda, the LRA, led by Joseph  Kony, has been forced to retreat into the neighbouring  countries of the Democratic Republic of Congo, Sudan and  Central African Republic. Recent research estimates about 400 soldiers still belong to  the rebel army, with about one-third of those children. And despite the United States last year implementing a new  bill, the LRA and Northern Uganda Recovery Act, to step up  efforts to eliminate the group, its fighters continue to  kill and abduct civilians in Central Africa, according to  Enough Project. Ledio Cakaj, Enough's Uganda-based field researcher and  author of the report, said the demobilisation efforts  required renewed political commitment from policy makers. 'While the debate on how to resolve the conflict has  fluctuated between war and mediation, less glamorous and  cheaper options such as encouraging defections and  peacefully engaging mid-level commanders have been rarely  pursued,' Cakaj said. 'It is time such efforts are taken seriously, especially  with the recent U. S.  legislation dealing with the LRA,' he  said. Cakaj said the trend of forcing ex-LRA soldiers into the  army compounded the already difficult experience fighters  faced in returning home. 'It is unethical that former combatants are pressured to  fight in the same jungles they spent years trying to leave  behind,' he said. 'Moreover, most, if not all, were abducted by the LRA, and  coercing them to fight amounts effectively to abducting them  again.  It is also unlawful to conscript combatants into the  Ugandan army with no training and no salaries.  By failing to  train and pay them, the Ugandan army is essentially  exploiting formerly exploited youth. 'To ensure demobilisation efforts are effective, Enough  Project works in partnership with organisations such as  Grassroots Reconciliation Group which runs programmes for  ex-LRA fighters in northern Uganda. According to its executive director Sasha Lezhnev, former  rebels can go on to lead constructive lives, if the  community and government properly support their  rehabilitation. 'Most of the (ex-LRA fighters) dream about starting small  businesses and starting a family,' Lezhnev told IPS.  'A lot  of them do farming, communal farming is a big activity, and  they're really interested in getting involved in long-term  crops.  Many also go into more labour-intensive work. ''However, a lot of them lack the start-up capital, literacy  or small business skills to get some of those enterprises  going,' he added, noting the need for more investment in  long-term rehabilitative programmes. While much has been done in Uganda to ameliorate the effects  of one of Africa's most brutal wars, Lezhnev said more work  was needed. 'When you go out to the former LRA affected areas, at least  on the Ugandan side, there's an overwhelming sentiment among  community leaders that the war is over, everything is okay,  but you just need to scratch the surface to see all the  scars of war are still there,' he said. 'The social scars between communities and ex-combatants, the  stigma to prevent people from starting up a small business,  the name-calling of kids in schools - it's all really still  going on,' Lezhnev said. 