In his commencement address to cadets at West Point Military  Academy last year, U. S.  President Barack Obama proclaimed, 'In  the 21st century our women in uniform play an indispensable  role in our national defence.  Time and again they have proven  themselves to be role models, not only for our daughters but  also for our sons. 'He pointed out that this year was the first time in the  Academy's history where female candidates earned the two top  awards for academic excellence. But while honouring female service members, Obama omitted a  fact that critics say is being deliberately concealed from  the public - namely, the staggering rate of sexual abuse  within the U. S.  military. In 2007, the Department of Defence (DoD) reported 2,200  cases of rape in the military.  In 2009, the figure jumped to  almost 3,300.  One in every three women in the army has  experienced some form of sexual assault, from harassment to  rape; 37 percent of victims are raped multiple times, 14  percent are gang raped. Overall, the rate of rape within the military is twice that  of the civilian population. Even more rampant than the abuse itself is the climate of  impunity in which these crimes are taking place.  According  to a two-part investigation published by Al-Jazeera in 2010,  over 50 percent of reported cases are dismissed for lack of  'proof' or adequate information, and of the 10 percent of  perpetrators who are actually prosecuted, most suffer  nothing more than a small pay cut or a reduction in rank.   Eighty percent of those accused receive an honourable  discharge. Late last year, the American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU),  in partnership with the Service Women's Action Network,  filed a complaint against the DoD and the Department of  Veterans Affairs (DoVA) using the State Department's Freedom  of Information Act (FOIA) as their platform. According to ACLU attorney Sandra Park, the Pentagon's  failure to respond to the FOIA complaint has now prompted  the plaintiffs to file a lawsuit. 'We're looking at the extent to which the U. S.  government is  fulfilling its duties to its service members and veterans  who have suffered, and continue to suffer, abuse from  within,' Park told IPS.  'And we need to know how both the  DoD and the DoVA respond to sexual assault in their own  ranks. 'An Impenetrable BureaucracyThough the ACLU has had a long and successful history of  utilising FOIA as a powerful tool in its advocacy work, the  layers of red tape wrapped tightly around the Pentagon have  thus far been impenetrable. Countless mechanisms have been in place for decades to  stymie reporting, recording and redress to victims of sexual  violence. According to Pack Parachute, a charity specialising in  providing need to veterans suffering from Military Sexual  Trauma (MST), the system is both hostile and archaic,  serving and protecting the perpetrator over the victim. Often reports of rape are ignored, or improperly  investigated by the military, which then prepares fallacious  reports on the rate and incidence of sexual abuse, the group  says. 'What we have heard repeatedly from service members is that  there is a definite culture of silence around rape,' Park  told IPS. 'When women experience sexual assault from another solider  they are forced to report it through their chain of command,  which basically amounts to zero confidentiality because  their commander, and quite likely several others, will  immediately be aware of the woman's situation,' she said. She added, 'The system is set up such that complaints about  sexual abuse reflect poorly on the commander's performance  evaluation, so there is a real incentive on commanders'  parts not to document or address the complaint at all  because it stains their own record. ''When women come forward, they are either dismissed by their  superior, or worse they face direct retaliation for having  made the complaint in the first place,' Park concluded. Pack Parachute's executive director, Kira Mountjoy-Pepka,  highlights the notorious Feres Doctrine, a piece of  legislation enacted in 1950 that makes it virtually  impossible to sue the military for negligent investigating  without 'the military's prior and explicit written consent',  as one of the biggest obstacles to justice. 'If this were taken up by Congress the military would be  exposed for operating against the Constitution by denying  victims their first amendment rights,' Mountjoy-Pepka said.   'The military always has their own investigators investigate  these cases, and that doesn't seem like justice to me. 'There are huge implications to the lawsuit beyond simply  obtaining information.  Scores of organisations working in  the service of veterans have been struggling to secure  funding for treatment of MST, or Post-Traumatic Stress  Disorder (PTSD) resulting from sexual abuse.  In the face of  such underreporting, it is virtually impossible for non- governmental organisations to ascertain the severity of the  crisis. Neither the DoD, nor the DoVA, provides consistent  disability compensation to ex-soldiers struggling to come to  terms with abuse and rape. In his book 'Sex and War', retired Special Forces Master  Sergeant Stan Goff discusses the disastrous impacts of the  'military's propensity to absorb, conceal, and sidetrack  interrogations into its outrageous institutional misogyny. '  Drawing on experience from his decades in the service, Goff  discusses with chilling foresight the impact of rape culture  within the U. S.  military on U. S.  society as a whole. 'Before we say that military men sexually assault women, we  have to concede that men sexually assault women,' Goff said. According to a report from the National Victim Center, an  average of 1,871 women in the U. S.  are raped every day.   Victims' advocates say these are not numbers that should be  read lightly; rather they should lead us all to question the  inevitable, brutal and lasting effects of an increasingly  militarised country on its population. According to the ACLU, however, this is not a trend that is  immediately evident in the attitudes of female service  members. 'What these women want is to be able to do their jobs,'  Parks told IPS.  'They wanted to serve in the military and  have done so voluntarily, they aspired to long careers in  the military and they believe in the mission of the  military.  But because of their experiences, they have  resigned or retired earlier than they might have done  because they did not get redress for their suffering.  Many  women believed that this was their life's work and are truly  disillusioned by the military's response. '