The commander of U. S. -NATO forces in southern Afghanistan,  Maj.  Gen.  James Terry, asserted last month that the homes  systematically destroyed by U. S.  forces across three districts  of Kandahar province as part of Operation Dragon Strike in  October and November 'were abandoned, empty and wired with  ingenious arrays of bombs'. But in interviews with IPS at the site of the destroyed  village of Tarok Kalache, now nothing more than a dusty  plain surrounded by orchards, former residents disputed that  account of the circumstances surrounding the destruction of  their village.  The residents said that they don't believe most of their  homes had been booby-trapped by the Taliban and that, even  after they had evacuated their homes, farmers from the  village had continued to tend their properties in and around  the village right up to the time the destruction began.  Beginning on Oct.  6, Tarok Kalache was subjected to bombing  by planes and long-range rockets that spread cluster bombs  throughout the village, according to Paula Broadwell.  Her  account of the destruction of the village, based on U. S.   military sources, was published in military writer Thomas  Ricks's blog and on her own Facebook page in January.  Broadwell, who is working on a biography of Gen.  David  Petraeus, wrote that the village was also razed with Mine  Clearing Line Charges, which destroys everything in a 600- metre-long stretch wide enough for a tank.  Residents told IPS the village was then bulldozed, because  the bombing had created huge craters which had to be filled  in and leveled off.  They said the operation was carried out  over an entire month. Based on briefings from U. S military sources, Broadwell  claimed on her Facebook page in mid-January that the  villagers had not really been displaced by the U. S.   offensive, because the Taliban had 'paid the village Malik  [village chief] around June-July to move out of the  village', and the villagers had followed, having 'made the  judgment call to 'sell' the village to the Taliban…. ' But residents of Tarok Kalache told IPS that they had begun  leaving their homes when the Taliban began gearing up for a  battle with U. S.  troops over the village, and that the  Taliban had allowed residents to return to check on their  houses, and to tend their gardens and orchards in and around  the village until the U. S.  attack began.  Haji-Dawoud Shah, a Tarok Kalache resident whose house was  destroyed by U. S.  troops along with the rest of the 36  houses in the village, said in an interview that he and  others had begun to leave only last August, when the Taliban  began planting IEDs and preparing for battle.  'We realised  that one day our children and women would be killed either  by IEDs or fighting,' he said.  But he said residents had returned frequently to the village  from Kandahar a few kilometres away to take care of their  houses and orchards, and had 'left our farmers in the  village to take care of the gardens'. Another resident of the village, Nik Muhammad, 40, agreed  that local people had been able to move in and around the  village even after they had left their houses, because the  Taliban had opened certain routes for the locals to use  safely so they could maintain their gardens and orchards.  Muhammad said the Taliban let farmers and other people  looking after their properties use certain footpaths that  were normally seeded with IEDs during the hours of 9 am to 4  pm.  He explained the Taliban ability to turn IEDs on and off as  involving removing and replacing batteries in the IEDS  buried in the ground.  After 4 pm, he said, they put the  batteries back in the IEDS so they were ready for  detonation.  Haji-Abdul Qayoum, 52, from the nearby village of Khisrow  Ulla, confirmed that Taliban arrangement with local farmers.   When the Taliban anticipated a patrol by U. S.  troops during  those hours, they told people to evacuate the area, warning  that the IEDs were going to be turned on again, according to  Qayoum.  In some cases people who didn't get the message were  injured by IEDs in the area, he said.  Specialists on IEDs at the Joint IED Defeat Organization  (JIEDDO) at the U. S.  Department of Defence have never heard  of battery-operated IEDs being used in Afghanistan,  according to JIEDDO spokesperson Irene Smith.   But in an e- mail to IPS, Smith said the Taliban do use both radio- controlled and command-wired IEDs, either of which would  have allowed them to activate and deactivate IEDS buried in  certain pathways.  One resident of Tarok Kalache, Dad Gul, 60, told IPS he was  taken back to the pulverised village by ANA and U. S.   soldiers 10 days after the end of the U. S.  operation.  The  soldiers told him there had been an IED in his house, and  when they got to site of his former home, the Americans  pointed to an object lying on the ground and said, 'This is  the bomb. ' 'Actually it was my pressure cooker,' said Gul.  'I grabbed  it and told them, 'This is mine! This is not a bomb!' ' Gul said some of the houses might have had IEDs in them,  'but not like Americans say. 'One of the ANA soldiers who had been listening to an  interview with three residents of the village commented,  'The Taliban planted IEDs inside houses, so the Americans  destroyed them, but people said IEDs were not planted in all  of the houses that were bombed. 'Although 250 labourers from the villages are now employed on  U. S-funded cash for work projects, no reconstruction has  begun on any of the 36 houses that had stood the village,  although work has started on rebuilding the village mosque.  Hajji Abdul Hamid, a village elder from Tarok Kalache, told  IPS he has been offered money to rebuild five of the 14  houses he owned in the village, and that the land for the  other nine is to be used for a U. S.  Forward Operating Base  in the village, for which he will be paid rent.  Hamid said he is 'happy with this deal, if they keep their  promise'.  But he added, 'There is no confidence or trust  between us yet, and we doubt whether America will deliver on  their promises. ' Even if the Americans keep their promises, the compensation  will be less than 50 percent of losses in Tarok Kalache,  Hamid said.  But he indicated that so far, only one percent  of the villagers' losses have been compensated.  He expects  complaints by villagers to continue for a long time.  'It will take time for people to trust the Americans and to  report the activities of the insurgents in the area,' the  village elder said. Another elder from Tarok Kalache, Hajji Shah Wali, said, 'We  can't get very close to the Americans,' because the  Americans still suspect that the villagers are Taliban  sympathisers.  The question on the minds of these villagers is whether the  Taliban will return in the spring.  'If they show up, we  won't feel secure, and people will be reluctant to help the  Americans,' Wali said.  Nik Muhammad said he is concerned that the U. S.  will help  reconstruct the houses in Tarok Kalache only if the  villagers agree to help them fight the Taliban.  'We will help the Americans, but we can't take up guns  against the Taliban,' he said.  'If the Americans and the  Afghan government force local people to take up guns against  the Taliban, I don't think people will accept this. ' *Shah Noori reported from Kandahar.   Gareth Porter is an  investigative historian and journalist specialising in U. S.   national security policy.  The paperback edition of his  latest book, 'Perils of Dominance: Imbalance of Power and  the Road to War in Vietnam', was published in 2006. 