A leading human rights group released a report Monday  documenting the proliferation of human rights abuses in Iraq  since the United States' invasion in 2003. Among the most egregious cases, the 102-page report by Human  Rights Watch identifies women, journalists, detainees and  marginalised groups, including internally displaced persons  and religious minorities, as the most vulnerable populations  in Iraq. 'Beyond the continuing violence and crimes associated with  it, human rights abuses are commonplace,' the report found. It said that in many instances the Iraqi government has  failed to pursue 'independent and impartial' investigations.  'At a Crossroads: Human Rights in Iraq Eight Years After the  US-Led Invasion' is based on 178 interviews with individuals  from a variety of stations in Iraqi society in seven cities  across the country dating back to April 2010.  The Iraqi government is a party to a number of international  treaties that clearly define the role of governments in  preventing human rights abuses, such as the Convention on  the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women  and the Convention against Torture.  However, the report  found that it has often failed to enact and enforce  commensurate legal and penal codes. A large portion of the HRW report focuses on the rights of  women and girls.  'The biggest victims in Iraq,' says one  female rights activist interviewed in Baghdad in 2010, 'are  young women. 'Before the 1991 Gulf War, the rights of women in Iraq were  'relatively better protected than other countries in the  region', thanks to a series of legal reforms promulgated by  the Ba'ath Party, 'specifically aimed at improving the  status of women in both the public and private spheres', the  report states. But as Saddam Hussein began to embrace 'Islamic and tribal  traditions as a political tool to consolidate his waning  power', the status of women's rights in Iraq witnessed a  dramatic decline.  This was only compounded by decades of  war, international sanctions and occupation that negatively  affected women and girls' rights disproportionally.  Forced marriages and prostitution and domestic and sexual  abuse are frequent occurrences in Iraq, according to the  report.  In one case HRW investigated, a 14-year-old Baghdadi was  kidnapped in 2010, drugged, taken to a residence that held  other Arab and Kurdish girls and was forced to 'sleep with  one or two men daily' — a story familiar to many victims of  forced prostitution in Iraq.  The report found that because 'victims of sexual violence  and trafficking have well-grounded fears of reprisals,  social ostracism, rejection or physical violence from their  families, and a lack of confidence that authorities have the  will or capacity to provide the support or protection  required,' many cases go completely unnoticed by the Iraqi  government.  Even those cases that are referred to  authorities are met with investigative reluctance. Western and Iraqi governments' seemingly ambivalent response  to the myriad human rights abuses include cases in which  Iraqi journalists have been threatened or victims of illegal  detention have been tortured.  Several months of  parliamentary gridlock in Iraq beginning in March 2010  caused pending human rights legislation to go unattended.  The HRW report also addresses the disproportionate number of  religious minorities and other 'marginalised communities'  that have been forced from their homes and villages due to  lack of security and religious extremism. Millions of internally displaced Iraqis now face an  increasingly precarious situation in what has become a full- fledged humanitarian crisis since the 2003 invasion.  While  security concerns have limited international humanitarian  workers' access to Iraqi populations most in need, Iraq's  government assistance to local NGOs, better suited to  address the humanitarian issues, has been lacking. Several Washington-based advocacy groups, including Refugees  International, have called on the United States to increase  pressure on the Iraqi government to 'meet its  responsibilities to its own people'. Much of this stems from the challenges intrinsic to post-war  reconstruction in Iraq, necessitating a continued effort by  the international community to alleviate the more serious  humanitarian issues.  But with budget cuts dominating the  political atmosphere in Washington, even United States aid  once considered to be critical to Iraq for sustained  improvements has come into question.  A Republican-led U. S.  House of Representatives budget  proposal for fiscal year 2011 takes aim at U. S.  foreign aid  as a primary budget-slashing target, which would include  funds appropriated for the Migration and Refugee Assistance  account - the account from which the U. S.  government  provides internally displaced Iraqis with many of the most  basic of necessities. In a report released last week, Refugees International  emphasised the impact modest sums of U. S.  foreign aid has on  internally displaced populations in Iraq and argues that  foreign aid for Iraq should remain at fiscal year 2010  levels.  The Republican budget proposal would cut the  Migration and Refugee account by 40 percent.  According to the report, without sufficient levels of  foreign aid, programmes such as the Diyala Initiative, which  'helped religious minorities and other Iraqis safely return  to their villages where there was extreme violence and  destruction', would likely falter.  The HRW report urges the governments of the United States  and Britain to continue pressing the Iraqi government to  reform its judicial system and legal code, 'provide  financial and technical assistance to civil society  organizations' within Iraq, make alternative 'refugee  resettlement places available', 'ensure that no one at risk  of torture…is transferred into Iraqi custody,' and  'investigate and prosecute crimes' committed by U. S.  and UK  forces. 