As conflict continues to rage in Afghanistan, the U. S.   Congress is gearing up to debate a bill that could support the  country's long-oppressed women in their struggle to achieve  gender equality, even in the years after the U. S.  military  occupation ends. Though the Afghan Women Empowerment Act has languished  through two sessions of Congress, Rep.  Carolyn B.  Maloney  does not want to give up on what she sees as a '(U. S. )  obligation to ensure that women and girls have the  opportunities that they were denied under the Taliban' —  namely their rights to work, education and healthcare. Amending the Afghanistan Freedom Support Act of 2002, this  Act would provide 45 million dollars to the Afghan  president, charging him to distribute the amount amongst  three entities: the Afghan Ministry of Women's Affairs (five  million dollars), the Afghan Independent Human Rights  Commission (10 million dollars), and the grassroots Afghan  women-led non-profit organisations (30 million dollars). Through such legislation, the U. S.  would continue to impact  Afghan society even after the total withdrawal of its  military forces, which is planned for the end of 2014, as  U. S.  Secretary of State Hillary Clinton reaffirmed on Feb.   18 in a speech at the Asia Society in New York.  Rep.  Maloney told IPS 'the funding that would be made  available under this bill would be directed toward important  needs including medical care, education, vocational  training, legal assistance, protection against trafficking,  and civil participation. ''I absolutely believe the Afghan Women Empowerment Act would  improve the lives of Afghan women and children,' she said.  But Ann Wright, a former U. S.  Army colonel who resigned to  protest the Iraq war in 2003 and has since become a  prominent peace activist, argues that there is a serious  problem with the plan. 'All the funding in the world won't help as long as there  continues to be fighting,' Wright told IPS. While U. S.  funding has been crucial to the country's  reconstruction efforts, Wright stressed to IPS that many  projects would be negated by the Taliban's ongoing  opposition to the occupation. She said a school built recently with U. S.  funds was likely  to 'become a target for Taliban and other groups to burn  down, just because they don't like what the USA is doing. 'She is joined on this issue by Malalai Joya, an Afghan  activist who was suspended from the Parliament in 2007 for  accusing the country's current parliamentarians, many of  them former warlords, of continued corruption and violence  in the fledgling democratic state. In an interview with news programme Democracy Now! in 2009,  Joya also outlined her doubts that Afghanistan could  democratise while occupied by the U. S. , arguing that it was  'impossible to bring democracy, women rights, human rights'  during a time of war. 'We are ready to build our country, if the USA and its  allies let us a little bit breathe in peace,' Joya said. 'They (the Americans) say women for the first time do not  wear burqa and are free, while it's a big lie.  And today,  most of women are wearing burqa because of security,' she  said. Wright's December 2010 trip to Afghanistan made her more  pessimistic, as she witnessed a 'tremendous construction  project for the U. S.  military,' adding to over 400 U. S.   military bases already spread across Afghanistan.  More worrying are the ongoing negotiations between Afghan  President Hamid Karzai and U. S.  President Barack Obama to  establish permanent U. S.  military bases on Afghan soil.  According to Wright, the proposed economic commitment to  maintain U. S.  soldiers in the country would detract from  money that could be otherwise channelled to the Afghan  people for reconstruction. 'It costs over one million dollars per U. S.  soldier (per  year) to keep a soldier there,' she said.  'The huge amounts  of money that the USA and other governments are giving, they  say for Afghanistan, are not for the people of Afghanistan …  It's just to support the military presence of these  countries in Afghanistan. 'And taking into account the 416 million dollars Washington  is going to spend to build its new embassy there, it is  obvious that 'certainly there would be some Afghans that  would feel that a foreign intervention, whether it's  military or economic or social interventions, is something  that they will fight against,' Wright said. However, some women's rights proponents, such as Esther  Hyneman, co-director of the civil society organisation Women  for Afghan Women (WAW), consider the U. S.  presence necessary  to avoid civil war and to protect women in Afghanistan. 'Funding is crucial,' Hyneman told IPS.  'Otherwise  facilities like ours wouldn't exist, and there would be no  schools, hospitals, universities, electricity, running  water, cell phones, Internet. 'Since its creation in 2001, WAW has opened five Family  Guidance Centres, a Children's Support Centre in Kabul in  2009, and four shelters.  '(We) have helped about 3,000 women  and girls whose rights were being violated,' Hyneman told  IPS. The executive director of the non-profit International  Association of Women Judges, Joan Winship, also underlined  the importance of funding for achieving progress in women's  rights in Afghanistan. 'The funding for our (judicial education programme with the  Afghan women judges) has come through U. S.  government  programmes in legal and judicial sector,' she told IPS.  