When disaster strikes, the initial humanitarian response tends  to focus on basic commodities like food and shelter.  But as  the crisis or conflict drags on, other critical needs often go  unmet — such as prenatal care for pregnant women, and  emergency contraception for victims of sexual assault. To close this gap, the U. N.  Population Fund (UNFPA) and  Women's Refugee Commission (WRC) - part of the International  Rescue Committee (IRC) — have launched a newly updated  Inter-Agency Field Manual on Reproductive Health in  Humanitarian Settings. The Field Manual targets health officials and providers,  such as doctors, nurses and midwives, as well as  policymakers and donors.  In addition to maternal and newborn  health and family planning, it also addresses gender-based  violence and sexually transmitted infections. 'When there is a breakdown in civil society. . .  sexual  assaults and violence go way up and people have pregnancies  and exposure to HIV,' Sandra Krause, reproductive health  programme director for WRC, told IPS on the sidelines of the  U. N.  Commission on the Status of Women this week.  'So it's really critical to be able to give women access to  emergency contraception and post-exposure prophylaxis to  prevent HIV,' she said. A rise of violence against women has been documented not  only in armed conflicts but following natural disasters as  well, such as this year's floods in Australia, the 2004  tsunami in Southeast Asia, Hurricane Mitch in Central  America 1998, and the 1991 Mount Pinatubo eruption in the  Philippines. The disastrous Jan.  12, 2010 earthquake in Haiti, which  affected over three million people, was 'a tipping point,  with people in the field recognising there was this priority  for reproductive health services,' said Krause. The Field Manual 'outlines what needs to be done in the  early days and weeks', but it also provides guidance for  comprehensive reproductive health services to be settled in  the longer term, Krause explained. 'Reproductive health is critically important for spacing  pregnancies because a lot of women and girls don't want to  be pregnant during an emergency like the tsunami,' she said,  'so we will always see a demand for family planning  services. 'The need for reproductive health services is especially  critical since '15 percent of pregnant women will experience  some type of unexpected complication with the pregnancy and  will require care or die,' she added. The Inter-Agency Working Group on Reproductive Health in  Crises was founded in 1995, pulling together more than 30  groups, from U. N.  agencies to NGOs to academia.  It published  its first Field Manual in 1999, creating the Minimum Initial  Service Package (MISP) to ensure reproductive health in  post-conflict or disaster-affected situations didn't fall  through the cracks. But when WRC did a field assessment some years later, it  discovered that most humanitarian workers were unaware of  the MISP and did not use it on the ground. For the latest edition, input was sought from every sector,  because 'if people … invested in it and know what's in it,  they're going to use it,' Krause told IPS - what she calls  'shared ownership'. WRC also developed a distance-learning module, available in  many languages.  The online programme explains, in three or  four hours, what the priority activities should be. 'Each chapter has a final online post-assessment and people  using it can get a certificate.  About 4,000 people have  completed the online distance-learning module,' said Krause. Ashley Wolfington, a reproductive health specialist at IRC,  stresses the need for family planning among youth, with  girls under 19 years old experiencing double the risk of  complications during pregnancy than older women.  Krause also pointed out that, 'Women and girls play a  tremendous role (in recovery). . .  and if they're sick or  unable to take care of their families and communities,  that's a problem. ' 'Women who are not suffering from complications from unsafe  abortions or miscarriages of the consequences of rape or HIV  transmissions are much more likely to be able to take care  of their families and contribute to building their  communities,' she said. The next step is empowering women themselves to think ahead  in terms of what they can do to protect themselves and  communicate with one another in the event of an outbreak of  war and violence. As part of a global launch, the Field Manual has already  been presented in Santo Domingo in May 2010, in Bangkok in  September 2010 and then in Geneva.  The event at the United  Nations Monday was the first U. S. -based launch. 