Pakistan's minister for minorities has been shot dead by armed  men in Islamabad. An official at the Pakistani capital's Shifa Hospital said  Shahbaz Bhatti arrived dead after Wednesday's attack, in  which his driver also got wounded. Police said they were still confirming whether Bhatti, the  only Christian in the Pakistani cabinet, was the intended  target. He had been threatened by Muslim religious groups in the  past because he had spoken out against the country's  controversial blasphemy law. The politician had just pulled out of the driveway of his  parents' house when three men standing nearby opened fire,  said Gulam Rahim, a witness. 'The initial reports are that there were three men who  attacked him.  He was probably shot using a Kalashnikov, but  we are trying to ascertain what exactly happened,' said  Wajid Durrani, Islamabad's police chief.  'They asked the driver to get out of the vehicle and then  peppered the minister with bullets,' Al Jazeera's Pakistan  correspondent, Kamal Hyder, reported from Islamabad. 'He was on his way to a cabinet meeting,' Hyder added. Bhatti had earlier requested extra security after he  received threats and shots were fired at his house in  Islamabad by unknown assailants. Durrani insisted that Bhatti had been provided with proper  security, but said the minister was not accompanied by his  security detail when the attack happened. Our correspondent said that, 'There are big question marks  over security here in Pakistan. 'Death threatsThe anti-blasphemy law has been in the spotlight since  November when a court sentenced Asia Bibi, a Christian  mother of four, to death. On Jan.  4, Salman Taseer, the governor of the most populous  province of Punjab, who had strongly opposed the law and  sought presidential pardon for Bibi, was gunned down by one  of his bodyguards. 'During this Bibi case I constantly received death threats.   Since the assassination of Salman Taseer. . .  these messages  are coming to me even publicly,' Bhatti said after the  governor was shot dead. But he had insisted that he would work as usual.  'I'm not  talking about special security arrangements.  We need to  stand against these forces of terrorism because they're  terrorising the country,' Bhatti told AFP news agency at the  time. 'I cannot trust on security. . . .  I believe that protection  can come only from heaven, so these bodyguards can't save  you,' he said. Al Jazeera's Hyder said it is most likely that Bhatti was  assassinated 'because of his involvement in the  recommendation to amendments to the blasphemy law'. 'It shows that nobody is secure in this country, although  Bhatti had received many death threats, due to the blasphemy  law row,' Hyder said. The Pakistani Taliban have claimed responsibility for the  attack. Earlier, private Pakistani TV channels showed pamphlets at  the scene of the killing that were attributed to the  Pakistani Taliban warning of the same fate for anyone  opposing the blasphemy laws. Pakistan's Dawn newspaper reported on its website that  government leaders had condemned the killing. 'This is concerted campaign to slaughter every liberal,  progressive and humanist voice in Pakistan,'  said Farahnaz  Ispahani, an aide to Asif Ali Zardari, Pakistan's president.   'The time has come for the federal government and provincial  governments to speak out and to take a strong stand against  these murderers to save the very essence of Pakistan. '*Published under an agreement with Al-Jazeera. 