As violent unrest continues unabated in Libya, with the  potential to descend into what U. S.  Secretary of State Hillary  Clinton called a 'protracted civil war' in statements to  lawmakers here this week, international rights groups are  raising the alarm over the resulting humanitarian crisis and  the particularly desperate plight of stranded immigrant  labourers. 'Thousands upon thousands of foreign workers remain stuck in  Benghazi, after being forced from their factories and losing  their possessions in last week's tumultuous events,' said  Human Rights Watch's emergencies director Peter Bouckaert,  who is in the opposition-held city. The United Nations estimates that between 600 and 2,000  peaceful protesters and innocent bystanders have been killed  at the command of Muammar Gaddafi's regime since its brutal  crackdown on anti-government demonstrations began over a  fortnight ago.  In the midst of this bloodshed, some 75,000 refugees have  fled to Tunisia and 69,000 to Egypt, with about 40,000  others unable to leave Libya, according to the latest  figures from the U. N.  High Commissioner for Refugees.  Among those stranded within the North African country's  borders are tens of thousands of immigrant workers from  developing nations. 'The people most in need are mainly from poorer countries in  Asia and Africa, who remain stuck in Benghazi and on the  border with Tunisia and whose governments have apparently to  date been unable or unwilling to rescue them,' Bouckaert  noted, urging for an international effort to help these  'highly vulnerable' populations flee for their safety.  Amnesty International says that 30,000 to 150,000 Filipino  OFWs (overseas foreign workers), 60,000 Bangladeshis, 2,000  to 5,000 Nepalis and over one million refugees, asylum- seekers and migrants, mostly from sub-Saharan Africa, were  in the country prior to the current crisis — with many of  them now trapped in the tumult. About 3,500 of these non-Africans — including labourers from  Bangladesh, Pakistan, the Philippines, Thailand and Vietnam  — are awaiting departure in two Benghazi camps, with  thousands of others in company compounds, according to Human  Rights Watch. But of greatest concern to these rights groups and UNHCR is  the reported discrimination against African immigrant  workers from south of the Sahara who are attempting, and  being denied, escape from the country's bloody turmoil due  to misguided suspicions that they are among the regime- contracted mercenaries.  Libya's ambassador to the U. N. , Ibrahim Dabbashi, said  Saturday that Gaddafi's hired guns, who are accused of  participating in the attacks against innocent civilians,  were imported from Chad, Ethiopia, Guinea, Kenya and Niger,  in addition to the North African countries of Algeria and  Tunisia. 'All those fleeing the chaos in Libya must be given  sanctuary by neighbouring states without discrimination —  not refused entry and put at risk of falling victim to  further violence,' said Michael Bochenek, AI's director of  Law and Policy.  'Day after day, some governments are managing to send boats  to evacuate thousands of their nationals, but Africans, who  are most vulnerable and destitute, are being left behind,'  Bouckaert echoed. While these migrants remain marooned, thousands of  foreigners from Algeria, Bosnia, Britain, Bulgaria, Canada,  China, Croatia, Greece, India, Jordan, Lebanon, Macedonia,  Morocco, the Netherlands, Nigeria, South Korea, Syria,  Turkey, the U. S. , Vietnam and other countries have been  evacuated in recent days by their companies or governments,  according to rights groups and media reports. 'If the European countries and the United States are serious  about their pledges of humanitarian assistance, they should  assist in getting these threatened and trapped African  migrants back home,' Bouckaert insisted. Meanwhile, the U. N.  has expressed concern about what it  deems to be a dearth of medical supplies and limited food  stocks in the oil-producing country. On Monday, the U. S.  announced that it has allocated 10  million dollars of emergency humanitarian assistance for  Libya and is dispatching two teams to assist refugees at the  Egyptian and Tunisian borders, while France pledged to send  two planes with medical staff and equipment to Benghazi —  what will be the West's first instance of direct aid inside  the country. Western governments, including that in Washington, have come  under some recent scrutiny by hawkish critics, who have  argued that their response to the violent developments in  Libya hasn't been forceful enough.  In light of the government-sanctioned crackdown and its  resulting humanitarian crisis, some arguments for military  options — from establishing a 'no-fly zone' to direct  intervention — invoke the doctrine of the 'responsibility to  protect' (R2P) against crimes against humanity, genocide and  war crimes, urging action by the international community.  R2P was mentioned in a U. N.  Security Council resolution  adopted Saturday that referred the situation in Libya to the  International Criminal Court, which prosecutes individuals  accused of these three mass crimes. 'The regime of Gaddafi has already started the genocide  against the Libyan people,' Dabbashi charged last week,  eliciting some debate over his controversial word choice.  While some folks advocate for armed action — drawing  comparisons between the estimated 1,000 deaths-too-many by  the Gaddafi regime and the Rwandan and Bosnian crises of the  1990s, which witnessed the mass murders of some 800,000 and  over 100,000 people, respectively — other observers,  referencing this decade's Iraq invasion and occupation of  Afghanistan, warn against the consequences of heavy-handed  involvement. 'The U. S.  would…be committing its military to violent regime  change in another Muslim nation,' wrote Ron Capps, director  of Refugees International's peacekeeping programme, in a  blog post Tuesday, adding: 'The potential backlash is  impossible to gauge. 'In addition to mobilising humanitarian assistance,  Washington announced Monday that it was repositioning some  naval and air forces closer to Libya.  In testimonies to  lawmakers this week, Clinton declared, '[W]e are taking no  option off the table so long as the Libyan government  continues to turn its guns on its own people. '