The world's key arms manufacturers are still firmly entrenched  in the United States and Western Europe, while some of the  newly-emerging military industries in China, India, Japan,  Singapore, South Korea, Israel, Turkey and Kuwait are trailing  mostly far behind. A new study released by the Stockholm International Peace  Research Institute (SIPRI) points out that only 10 of the  world's 100 largest arms manufacturers are now based in Asia  and the Middle East, with none in Latin America or Africa. The companies listed in the report include Hindustan  Aeronautics and Bharat Electronics (India), Israel Aerospace  Industries and Rafael (Israel), Mitsubishi Heavy Industries  and Kawasaki Heavy Industries (Japan), Samsung (South  Korea), ST Engineering (Singapore) and Aselsan (Turkey). The weapons manufactured by some of these companies include  fighter planes, helicopters, jet trainers, drones, fast  attack craft, missiles, battle tanks and electronic warfare  systems. But many of the arms manufacturers in these countries are  seeking collaborative partners with U. S.  or European  companies, either for joint military production or  technology transfers, 'in order to springboard into more  sophisticated technologies'. China, on the other hand, has its own vibrant arms industry  with companies such as China North Industries Corporation  (Norinco), China Aviation Industry Corporation and China  Shipbuilding Industry Corporation producing a wide range of  military products, including jet fighters, helicopters,  warships and heavy artillery. Still, the leaders in the defence industry come  overwhelmingly from the United States and Western Europe,  including companies such as Lockheed Martin, Northrop  Grumman, Boeing, Raytheon, United Technologies (US), British  Aerospace Systems, Aerospatiale-Matra and European  Aeronautic Defence and Space Company, according to the  study. Asked whether Asian and Middle Eastern companies will catch  up with the United States and Western Europe, Dr.  Susan  Jackson, SIPRI's arms industry expert, told IPS: 'As a  project, we do not make forecasts. 'But it is generally hard to say where these companies will  be in 10 years, especially given uncertainties on what  countries will perceive as their purchasing needs, she  added. Jackson said it is challenging for arms producers outside of  the United States and Western Europe to increase their arms  sales to the same levels, especially when compared to the  United States. 'The United States has such a large arms market and in the  near term is likely to continue purchasing - which makes it  difficult for companies outside of the U. S.  market to  increase their ranking even if they increase their arms  sales,' said Jackson, researcher and head of SIPRI's Arms  Production Project Military Expenditure and Arms Production  Programme. The SIPRI report points out that despite the continuing  global economic recession in 2009, total arms sales of the  world's 100 largest arms-producing companies increased by  14. 8 billion dollars from 2008 to reach 401 billion dollars  in 2009, according to the latest available figures. This was a real increase of eight percent, according to new  data on international arms production released last week by  the Stockholm-based institute dedicated to research into  conflicts, armaments, arms control and disarmament. Jackson said U. S.  government spending on military goods and  services is a key factor in rising arms sales by U. S.  arms- producing and military services companies and for Western  European companies. And some of the European countries have a foothold in the  U. S.  arms and military services market, making them  beneficiaries of rising U. S.  defence spending. According to the data in the new report, 45 of the top 100  companies are based in the United States. These companies generated just under 247 billion dollars in  total arms sales, which is 61. 5 percent of the top 100 arms  sales, while 33 are based in nine Western European  countries: Finland, France, Germany, Italy, Norway, Spain,  Sweden, Switzerland and the UK. These companies generated 120 billion dollars in total arms  sales, which is 30 percent of the top 100 arms sales, while  26 of the key Western European arms producers are based  primarily in four countries: France, Germany, Italy, and the  UK. Last week a London daily reported that the United States had  expressed doubts about the suitability of corporate  partnership with an Indian aerospace company in a hefty 11- billion-dollar contract to provide New Delhi with 126 new  fighter planes.  Asked about the progress made by non-European and non-U. S.   companies, Jackson singled out the Israeli arms industry,  which relies heavily on the United States. But one area in which Israel competes in the global arms  markets in its own right is in Unmanned Aerial Vehicle (UAV)  research and development. 'There are other areas but UAVs are a good example because  Israel is a leading producer of UAVs for the global arms  market,' she pointed out. Jackson said Israel decided earlier on that it would focus  on niche markets and that is what it has done. She said there will be more information on Israel, as well  as South Korea and Turkey, in the SIPRI Yearbook due to be  released in June. 