Paramilitary groups in Colombia continue to threaten, harass  and violently attack women's rights activists, says Patricia  Guerrero, founder of a leading human rights group. Behrous Amiri spoke with Guerrero, who helped found the  'City of Women' outside Cartagena in 2003, a space where  women displaced by the fighting could evolve from victims to  agents of change. Altogether, some 5. 2 million people were forced to flee  rural areas of this South American country between 1985 and  2010, according to a report released in February by the  Consultancy on Human Rights and DisplacementExcerpts from the interview follow. Q: Your group was recently threatened by a paramilitary  group for the fourth time.  Which one was it?  A: The Black Eagles, Águilas Negras. Q: You help women who were forced to flee their communities,  homes and lands due to violence.  Why is Águilas Negras  threatening you?  A: Because we are women human rights defenders.  And they  hate human rights, particularly women's rights.  They hate  justice, reparations, and the truth about the crimes  committed by them. Everybody in this country knows that they are state agents  behind that ridiculous name.  They want to scare our  communities, [which are] in peaceful resistance against  perpetrators of crimes again humanity and war crimes.  They  are panicked by our knowledge of their crimes, because we  have documented their crimes for more than 10 years.  They  are panicked by our capacity and commitment to justice for  displaced women. They killed more than 50 human rights leaders, men and  women, last year, they are really killers. Q: How is your work affected by the paramilitary threats?   A: The League of Displaced Women represents more than 600  families in the northern part of Colombia, known as the  Caribbean region.  This area was impacted by many  paramilitary groups, who carried out numerous massacres.  In the last five years, they committed many atrocities  against our people and projects. They killed Jose Miguel Peréz Espitia, the husband of one of  our indigenous leaders. They burned down our community centre, called the Heart of  the Women, Corazón de las Mujeres in Turbaco Bolívar. They make threatening pay phone calls to our leaders. They killed Jair Pantoja Berrio, in the barrio el Pozón in  Cartagena. They raped more than 10 women of our organisation in the  conflict and they displaced 56 percent of our people. They killed many families, stole their land, and destroyed  the social fabric and community history.  All these crimes  remain unpunished. Q: What are the objectives of the Liga de las Mujeres  Desplazadas and what have you achieved so far?  A: The restitution of every single and collective right,  land rights for example, of the women of our organisation  and the displaced women in Colombia.  Justice at the national  and international level.  Protection at the national and  international level for the leaders and the women in  communities like the City of Women. In that regard, we have protective special measures provided  by the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights, which also  accepted our first case against the Colombian state for  violations of treaties like the American Convention on Human  Rights and the Convention of Belém do Para related to  violence and discrimination against women.    Q: Could you describe the situation of displaced women in  Colombia?  A: Displaced women in Colombia are 60 percent of the more  than five million people displaced in the last 10 years.   Forced displacement is a crime against women and children.   They are the poorest of the poor, and they have many  historic handicaps because they were also discriminated  against before being forcibly displaced. They don't have a high level of education, and they have  lost their livelihoods as campesinas since they and their  families were forced to leave their land, which is now in  the bloody hands of narco-paramilitaries. Displacement and rape are usually connected.  Many families  are destroyed for that reason.  Women lost their economic  support and prostitution became a solution for some of the  IDP [displaced] women.  Child prostitution, very young narco  gangs who fit the narco military economy, very easy forced  recruitment for the war and so on - that is the circle of  violence in this country for decades.  Rape, HIV/AIDS and  other silent diseases are part of this panorama.  Q: What impact do threats have on the daily life of you and  your colleagues?  A: We must strengthen the strategies of community  protection, particularly of young women and leaders.  We have  to work more and faster.  One of our leaders started a new  mothers' organisation against forced disappearances in  September 2009 when her youngest son was killed in  Cartagena. In some parts of Cartagena, more than five young men and  women are killed every week. I continue my work as a lawyer at the international level in  the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights as a chair of  the gender justice agenda, and to demand answers from the  [Colombian] state about the intellectual actors behind [the  violence], and how it will protect IDP women, particularly  the women of the Displaced Women's League.  On Feb.  18, we  demanded a meeting with the foreign minister, the minister  of justice, and with the attorney-general of Colombia. Q: What can you do about the threats of the Águilas Negras?  A: We have three denunciations filed in the office of the  attorney-general, but none have been answered.  We are  demanding the disbanding of the paramilitary structures, severing the connection between paramilitaries and some  security sectors, for example, the police and armed forces.   [We are demanding an end to] the impunity for state crimes,  and crimes against IDP women leaders in Colombia. Q: What do the displaced women you are working with urgently  need?  A: The international community, the U. N. , the Special  Rapporteur on Violence against Women of the U. N.  system,  U. N.  Women, the CSW have to demand answers from the  Colombian government, from President [Juan Manuel] Santos,  related to these continuous threats against women's rights  defenders, particularly at the grassroots level like the  Displaced Women's League. Impunity and violence against women is a huge roadblock to  peace.  We denounce the militarisation of our lives in the  name of the war on drugs, the war on terrorism, the war on  everything that threatens capitalism and their financial  world. We demand the legalisation of coca and respect of the  indigenous ancestral culture.  We demand social and political  responsibility of the United States and the European Union  for the crimes committed in Colombia in the name of war on  drugs. 