The global civil society campaign for the abolition of nuclear  weapons could be politically reignited by the phenomenal  successes of the grassroots demonstrations in Egypt and  Tunisia, shadowed closely by Libya, Bahrain, Yemen and Jordan. 'Developments in the Middle East [and North Africa] show how  fragile 'stability' is when people's needs and desires are  ignored,' says Hirotsugu Terasaki, executive director of the  Office of Peace Affairs at the Tokyo-based Soka Gakkai  International (SGI). 'There is no more natural desire than to be free from the  threat of nuclear weapons.  This is something shared widely,  universally, among the world's people,' he said. Asked what role global civil society can play in the  worldwide campaign to abolish nuclear weapons, Terasaki told  IPS: 'The mission of civil society is to empower and amplify  the voices of ordinary citizens so that we can move the  world's policy-makers, insisting they take real and  meaningful steps towards nuclear weapons abolition. 'Because the threat is so vast and pervasive, he pointed out,  'We need a new paradigm of leadership - the leadership  exercised by ordinary people who have decided to reject the  'stability' of deterrence, which rests ultimately on the  threat of mutual annihilation. 'A lay Buddhist organisation with an estimated 12 million  members in over 192 countries and territories, SGI has long  been active in the growing NGO campaign towards a nuclear  weapons-free world. SGI President Daisaku Ikeda, one of the strongest proponents  of nuclear disarmament, has dismissed the theory of 'nuclear  deterrence' advocated by most of the world's nuclear powers. The five 'declared' nuclear powers are the United States,  Britain, France, China and Russia while the four  'undeclared' nuclear states are India, Pakistan, Israel and  North Korea. 'It is necessary to thoroughly challenge the theory of  deterrence upon which nuclear weapons possession is  predicated: the assumption that the maintenance of security  is realised through a balance of terror,' says Ikeda. Last month, a coalition of peace activists and civil society  organisations meeting in Santa Barbara, California  discredited the long-held myth of 'nuclear deterrence' and  called for its replacement with an 'urgent commitment to  achieve global nuclear disarmament'. 'Nuclear deterrence is a doctrine that is used as a  justification by nuclear weapon states and their allies for  the continued possession and threatened use of nuclear  weapons,' the coalition said in a statement. A declaration adopted by the coalition said: 'We call upon  people everywhere to join us in demanding that the nuclear  weapon states and their allies reject nuclear deterrence and  negotiate without delay a Nuclear Weapons Convention for the  phased, verifiable, irreversible and transparent elimination  of all nuclear weapons. 'The civil society participants at the meeting ranged from  representatives from the Lawyers Committee on Nuclear Policy  and the Nuclear Age Peace Foundation to Physicians for  Social Responsibility and the Disarmament and Security  Centre. Last year, member states agreed on a proposal for an  international conference on a nuclear-free Middle East,  scheduled to take place in 2012.  Currently, Israel is the  only nuclear power in that region and has been long shielded  by the United States. 'The enduring regional stability in the Middle East is  unthinkable without de-nuclearisation,' says Ikeda, who is  calling for 'conditions propitious to negotiations for a  Middle East free of all weapons of mass destruction (WMDs),  including nuclear weapons'. The WMDs also include biological and chemical weapons which  have been banned by the United Nations. The uncertainty about the 2012 conference underlines the  need for further efforts to create the conditions for  dialogue, said Ikeda. The SGI president has laid out three steps towards the goal  of nuclear disarmament. First, the need to establish structures 'within which states  possessing nuclear weapons will move rapidly toward  disarmament'. Secondly, the need to forestall 'further nuclear weapons  development or modernisation', and thirdly, the need to  'comprehensively' outlaw 'these inhumane weapons through a  Nuclear Weapons Convention'. Asked how effective a global campaign would be -  particularly in the face of growing indifference towards an  international convention to ban nuclear weapons - Terasaki  told IPS nuclear weapons are not something to which people  can be indifferent because they threaten lives and the very  existence of the world. 'The real choice is whether this indifference will be broken  down by proactive human wisdom, or by overwhelming tragedy  and horror,' he said. 'Our work as a civil society organisation is dedicated to  ensuring that the former is the case,' Terasaki declared. 