The international community is ramping up efforts to alleviate  the growing humanitarian crisis in Libya, with has affected  over 200,000 people since the Muammar Gaddafi regime first  began a violent crackdown on opposition forces some three  weeks ago. According to the United Nations' latest figures, donors have  pledged some 22 million dollars of humanitarian aid for the  besieged North African country, out of a total 160 million  requested Monday by the world body in a 'flash appeal' for  the next three months. The funds will be funnelled to 17 aid organisations and are  intended to support 400,000 refugees and evacuees, half of  whom have already fled, and 600,000 others inside Libya's  borders who are expected to need assistance, the world body  reports. On Sunday, Libyan Foreign Minister Musa Kusa agreed to allow  a U. N.  humanitarian assessment — to be dispatched  'immediate[ly]' — into the country.  Donor nations, like the  United States, France and Italy, have sent refugee  assistance teams to the Libyan borders, while local and  international aid groups have been conducting relief efforts  within Libyan borders. U. N.  chief Ban Ki-moon also appointed Abdelilah Al-Khatib as  his special envoy 'to undertake urgent consultations with  the authorities in Tripoli and in the region on the  immediate humanitarian situation as well as the wider  dimensions of the crisis,' Martin Nesirky, Ban's  spokesperson, said Sunday. Al-Khatib will meet with Ban this week before departing for  the region.  It is not yet clear where the special envoy will  set up camp or whether he will meet with opposition forces,  but Nesirky said Monday that the former Jordanian foreign  minister would not be based inside Libya. The scope of these assistance efforts reflects the urgency  of the situation, with aid groups and U. N.  agencies warning  of dwindling medical supplies and food stocks and reports of  difficulties accessing those in need.  The U. N.  refugee agency was able to deliver a total of 53  tonnes of food and medical supplies to the port city of  Tubruq, via the Egyptian Red Crescent Society, in the East  and to Salloum on the Egypt-Libya border on MondayBut last Thursday, the World Food Programme chartered-ship  carrying 1,000 tonnes of flour destined for opposition- controlled Benghazi, the country's second largest city, had  to turn back as a result of reported aerial attacks by pro- government forces in the vicinity. And in the west, Valerie Amos, the U. N. 's top humanitarian  affairs and emergency relief official, reported from the  border Sunday that aid groups were having difficulty  accessing the city of Misrata. 'Humanitarian organisations need urgent access now,' she  said.  'People are injured and dying and need help  immediately.  I call on the authorities to provide access  without delay to allow aid workers to help save lives. 'The United Nations estimates that between 600 and 2,000  peaceful protesters and innocent bystanders have been killed  at the command of Muammar Gaddafi's regime since the  violence began.  The majority of the refugees, mostly foreign labourers, have  fled to Tunisia and Egypt.  While tens of thousands of these  workers have been able to return home, tens of thousands  more — especially those from poorer Asian and African  countries — are stranded in tent camps. As of Sunday, the International Organization for Migration  (IOM) reports that 22,500 migrants, mostly from Bangladesh,  await evacuation. 'IOM is greatly concerned at the plight of Libyans and  migrants who are still stranded inside Libya,' the  organisation's director general William Lacy Swing said.   'Those managing to get out, in particular Sub-Saharan  Africans, are recounting to us terrible stories of  targeting, physical violence and of being held back from  leaving. '