Under growing political pressure at home, President Barack  Obama inched closer here Monday towards committing U. S.   military power to at least protecting areas under rebel  control, if not ending the 42-year reign of Libyan leader  Moammar Gaddafi. For the first time in the three-week-old crisis that looks  increasingly like a civil war, Obama spoke about taking  'potential military options' to end or alter the conflict,  which see-sawed over the weekend in fighting in several key  towns and cities along the Mediterranean coast. '(W)e've got NATO, as we speak, consulting in Brussels  around a wide range of potential options, including  potential military options, in response to the violence that  continues to take place inside of Libya,' he told reporters  during a brief public appearance with visiting Australian  Prime Minister Julia Gillard. Repeating earlier warnings that the violence perpetrated by  pro-regime forces was 'unacceptable', Obama also said it was  important to send 'a very clear message to the Libyan people  that we will stand with them in the face of unwarranted  violence and the continuing suppression of democratic ideals  that we've seen there. 'Obama spoke as the ambassadors of NATO member-states began a  series of intensive talks this week to culminate in a  defence ministers' meeting Thursday. Briefing the press by teleconference from Brussels,  Washington's NATO ambassador, Ivo Daalder, said the alliance  had already decided to increase flights by AWACS  surveillance aircraft from 10 to 24 hours a day to aid both  humanitarian-supply efforts that have already begun, but  also to prepare the ground for possible military  intervention, as well. Ministers will consider plans to enforce an existing U. N.   arms embargo against Libya and may well take up the  imposition of a no-fly zone (NFZ), he said.  The latter is  favoured by Britain and France, despite anticipated  opposition from veto-wielding Russia and China, as well as  other Council members, including Brazil and Turkey. 'Everyone would want another U. N.  Security Council  resolution,' Daalder said. Obama's suggestion that Washington is considering military  options beyond the delivery of humanitarian aid marked the  latest development in a growing debate over what to do about  Libya. When it became clear early last week that Gaddafi - unlike  his counterparts in Tunisia and Egypt - was determined to  fight popular protests and uprisings across the country with  lethal force, neo-conservatives and some liberals among the  U. S.  foreign policy elite appealed to Obama and NATO to  impose an NFZ and disable Libyan naval vessels in order to  reduce the regime's capacity for violence, if not bring 'an  end to the murderous Libyan regime', as one letter signed by  some 40 analysts urged. Even as Obama and other senior officials toughened their own  rhetoric against Gaddafi, however, top Pentagon officials  spent much of last week pushing back against the hawks. Defence Secretary Robert Gates, who told West Point cadets  Feb.  25 that any successor 'who advises the president to  again send a big American land army into Asia or into the  Middle East or Africa should 'have his head examined,''  warned lawmakers against the consequences of using 'the U. S.   military in another country in the Middle East'. 'Let's just call a spade a spade,' he said.  'A NFZ begins  with an attack on Libya.  …(I)f it's ordered, we can do it.   But the reality is, there's a lot of, frankly loose talk  about some of these military options. 'Gates was backed up by the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of  Staff, Adm.  Mike Mullen, who described a NFZ as 'an  extraordinarily complex operation to set up', and the head  of the U. S.  Central Command, Gen.  James Mattis.  'So no illusions here,' the latter told one committee.  'It  would be a military operation.  It wouldn't just be telling  people not to fly airplanes. 'As late as Sunday, Obama's chief of staff, William Daley,  scorned the idea.  'Lots of people throw around phrases of  'no-fly zone' — they talk about it as though it's just …a  video game or something,' he told an NBC interviewer.  'When  people comment on military action, most of them have no idea  what they're talking about. 'But the hawks were not deterred.  Obama's 2008 Republican  presidential rival, Sen.  John McCain, joined by the Senate  Minority Leader, Mitch McConnell, argued Sunday in favour of  a NFZ and other measures, including possibly arming the  rebels and recognising their provisional government in  Benghazi. 'We can't risk allowing Gaddafi to massacre people from the  air,' McCain, a former pilot who was shot down on a bombing  mission over Hanoi during the Vietnam War, said on ABC.   'Their air defences are somewhat antiquated, and this would  send a signal to Gaddafi that President (Obama) is serious  when he says we need for Gaddafi to go,' he added. At the same time, the chairman of the Foreign Relations  Committee John Kerry, who has frequently acted as a proxy  for the administration, also came out for stronger measures,  suggesting that Washington bomb Libya's airports and runways  to make its air force unusable, if not, at least for now,  impose an NFZ, which, he insisted, would not constitute  'military intervention'. Still others, such as the neo-conservative Wall Street  Journal and Tom Ricks, a prominent military analyst at the  Center for a New American Security, have suggested jamming  the regime's propaganda broadcasts and military  communications, as well as providing weapons to the  insurgents.  Ricks warned Monday on his foreignpolicy. com blog that  inaction on Washington's part was increasingly difficult to  defend '(b)ecause we don't want the lesson to Arab autocrats  to be that all you need to do is shoot up the rebels and the  West will turn tail. 'But other analysts disagreed. 'Although the impetus to take some sort of forceful action  on behalf of endangered and oppressed Libyans is  understandable, establishment of a no-fly zone - with  everything that would have to go with it militarily - would  change the character of the conflict from a popular uprising  to something looking more like a war between NATO and an  Arab country,' Paul Pillar, a former top Middle East CIA  analyst, told IPS.  'That would not necessarily be in the best interest of  further favourable political change in the Middle East.  Such  a step by NATO also - given the prospect of a prolonged  struggle on the ground in Libya - could become a lengthy  endeavour with no clear termination point,' he noted in an  email exchange. 'The U. S.  should be very careful about getting in the middle  of a civil war,' said Charles Kupchan, an analyst at the  Council on Foreign Relations.  'It should focus on minimising  the loss of life and the delivery of humanitarian  assistance, but, at this point in the conflict, it would be  dangerous to introduce U. S.  military force, because it's  conceivable we could cause more bloodletting than less. ''The best outcome from a U. S.  perspective is a home-grown  toppling of the regime, so I would focus on efforts to  further erode support for Gaddafi, in part by providing  incentives to units still loyal to him to peel off, but I  think the downside risks of direct intervention are still  too high,' he said. *Jim Lobe's blog on U. S.  foreign policy can be read at  http://www. lobelog. com. 