When Muammar el-Gaddafi went on an arms-buying spree in the  1970s and 80s - stockpiling a staggering array of  sophisticated weapons systems both from the East and West -  the United States warned that Libya was in danger of becoming  one of the world's most 'overarmed' countries. If military forces from the United States and the North  Atlantic Treaty Organisation (NATO) decide to enforce a 'no- fly' zone over Libya, the Europeans are likely to confront  some of their own weapons systems, which may come back to  haunt them. Besides Soviet-made Sukhoi Su-24, Tupolev Tu-22 and MiG-25  fighter bombers, Libya is also armed with French-made  Mirages, Dassault Falcon trainers and Aerospatiale  helicopters. The Italians supplied Libya with over 120 SIAI-Marchetti  trainers, the French with Crotale surface-to-air missiles,  the United States with Lockheed C-130 transport aircraft and  the British with Centurion battle tanks and Saladin and  Ferret armored personnel carriers. The weapons from Europe also include assault rifles from  Belgium, howitzers from Sweden and the Artemis anti-aircraft  air defence system from Greece. Armed with rising oil revenues, the Libyan leader built a  massive military arsenal that also included weapons from a  non-conventional source: Brazil. The Brazilians provided over a 1,000 Cascavel and Urutu  fighting vehicles and armored personnel carriers delivered  in the early 1980s (and which could be used against civilian  demonstrators). Pieter Wezeman, senior researcher, Arms Transfers Programme  at the Stockholm International Peace Research Institute  (SIPRI), told IPS Libya is still largely dependent on the  major weapons arsenals it built in the 1970s and 1980s. 'Many of these were probably stored because Gaddafi did not  have the personnel to operate them,' he said. It is very questionable how many of the weapons are still  serviceable and operational after about 12 years of arms  embargoes, imposed by the United States and Western Europe  in the mid-1980s. 'For sure they are no longer up to date and no match for a  well organised U. S.  or NATO air campaign,' Wezeman added.  Still, an overwhelming proportion of Libya's weapons came  from the former Soviet Union and later its successor state,  Russia, according to defence analysts. At the 25th anniversary celebrations of the military coup  that brought Gaddafi to power, over 1,000 Soviet-made T-62  and T-72 battle tanks were on public display during the  September 1994 parade in the streets of Tripoli. Last week, Sergei Chemezov, director of a Russian arms  exporting company, was quoted as saying that Russia stands  to lose over four billion dollars in arms contracts with  Libya. But he admitted that Russia has not sold any shoulder-fired  anti-aircraft weapons - that could be used against Western  aircraft - to Libya since 1992. According to European Union (EU) statistics quoted by the  New York Times last week, Italy has been the EU's largest  arms exporter to Libya, while Libyan investors are said to  have a two percent stake in the Italian aerospace and  defence company Finmeccanica. Meanwhile, the United States had earmarked 330,000 dollars  to train Libyan soldiers and military personnel under the  International Military Education and Training (IMET)  programme in 2010, increasing to 350,000 dollars in 2011. But the U. S.  foreign assistance programme in Libya was  'focused on bolstering Libya's commitments to renouncing  weapons of mass destruction (WMD), combatting the rapidly  growing terrorist threat posed by al-Qaeda in the region,  and promoting professional and effective law enforcement and  military services that respect international norms and  practices,' according to the State Department. Wezeman told IPS that Libya has been interested in buying  new major weapons systems since the U. N.  and EU arms  embargoes were lifted in 2003-2004. But despite all kinds of unconfirmed reports that major  deals had been signed, there is no reason to believe that  any new major arms have been delivered since 2004, save for  some Milan anti-tank missiles from France. He said arms producers, with high level support from their  national governments, in the UK, France, Italy and Russia  have all been marketing their products aggressively in Libya  in recent years. 'The will to sell was there, but Gaddafi seems to have been  careful with signing contracts,' he noted. Wezeman also said that some of these existing weapons are  known to have been refurbished or upgraded in recent years. A UK-based company, GDUK, provided a communication system  for use in T-72 tanks and the French company Dassault  refurbished several, possibly up to 12, Mirage F-1 combat  aircraft, two of which were probably the ones which defected  to Malta a week ago. Italian Finmeccanica has been refurbishing CH-47 transport  helicopters and was contracted to refurbish Palmaria heavy  artillery. Wezeman also said Libya did invest in border protection  projects, buying surveillance equipment and surveillance  aircraft worth hundreds of millions of Euros from  Finmeccanica in the past few years. Libya has also tried to obtain large numbers of rifles, he  said. Ukraine reported in 2006-2007 that it exported 101,500  rifles to Libya and a Russian company reportedly received a  contract for the delivery of 500,000 rifles. A Belgian company sold a small batch of high-tech rifles to  Libya some years ago and an Italian company delivered a  batch of high-tech police rifles a year ago, said Wezeman. 'There is reason [to believe] that even more has been  delivered from other sources.  These new weapons come on top  of the large arsenal Libya had built up in the 1970-80s and  which can still be used,' Wezeman declared. He also predicted that a U. S. /NATO air strike on Libya  would, without much doubt, quickly destroy its major  weapons: very similar to what happened in the case of Iraq  in 1990 and 2003. 'However, any ground operations could run into the same  troubles as in the case of Iraq.  With the enormous amount of  small arms and light weapons around it will be easy for  anyone who wants to fight to obtain the weapons needed,'  Wezeman added. 