As the tide of battle appeared to shift for the first time  Thursday in favour of forces loyal to Libyan leader Moammar  Gaddafi, the United States and its European allies moved  closer toward intervening - if not yet militarily - on the  side of the insurgency. In testimony before Congress, Secretary of State Hillary  Clinton announced that she will meet with rebel leaders when  she travels to France, Tunisia and Egypt in the coming week.   She also said Washington had suspended relations with  Libya's embassy here. At the same time, President Barack Obama's national security  adviser, Thomas Donilon, said the administration is sending  humanitarian assistance teams into eastern Libya with the  cooperation of rebel authorities there, presumably to  prepare for the delivery of humanitarian assistance. In a teleconference with reporters, Donilon said Washington  and its NATO allies continue to move maritime and other  assets into the region for other possible contingencies,  including enforcing a U. N.  Security Council arms embargo on  the regime, imposing a no-fly zone (NFZ) to prevent Gaddafi  from using his warplanes over contested areas, and 'a full  range of additional options', notably 'additional kinds of  supplies to the opposition'. 'We've been directly engaged with the opposition groups in  learning about the [governing] structures that have been  emerging, the leadership, who they are, who they represent,  and what their goals are,' he said, adding that the rebels  appeared to be in de facto control of over half of Libya's  6. 5 million people. The latest U. S.  steps came as France and Portugal became the  first Western governments to formally recognise the rebel  Libyan National Council as the 'legitimate representative of  the Libyan people'. French President Nicolas Sarkozy, who, according to an AFP  report, will urge Friday's emergency European Union (EU)  meeting in Brussels to consider air attacks against key  Gaddafi command centres, also announced that Paris will soon  send an ambassador to the new government in Benghazi, the  eastern city where the rebellion began. His announcements came as pro-Gaddafi forces appeared to  gain the upper hand over the past 24 hours.  After a series  of battles over the past several days, rebel forces  reportedly lost control of Zawiya, about 50 kms west of  Tripoli, and withdrew under fire from the strategic oil port  of Ras Lanuf, effectively dashing for now their hopes of  advancing westwards toward the capital. The latter marked an important victory for Gaddafi, whose  son, Seif al-Islam Gaddafi, suggested that pro-regime forces  would now move eastward toward Benghazi.  'I send a message  to our brothers and friends in the east who are sending us  daily calls for help and asking us to rescue them: We're  coming,' he reportedly told a rally in the capital. The rebels are 'in for a tough row', Obama's Director of  National Intelligence (DNI) Gen.  James Clapper told a Senate  hearing here Thursday.  Given Gaddafi's greater logistical  resources and weaponry, he said, 'I think, from a standpoint  of attrition …in the longer term that the regime will  prevail. 'While Donilon agreed that Gaddafi held certain strictly  military advantages at the moment, he insisted that  Clapper's assessment did not take account of a number of  other factors, noting, in particular, that 'the  international community is engaged in an increasingly deep  way with the opposition,' and that such engagement is likely  to deepen in the coming days. Precisely how it will do so — and what Washington's role  will be — has become the source of a raging public debate  between neo-conservative hawks and liberal interventionists  who favour military action, unilaterally if necessary, on  the one hand, and foreign policy 'realists' both in and  outside the administration, on the other. While the imposition of strong diplomatic and economic  sanctions - the Obama administration froze some 32 billion  dollars in U. S. -based Libyan assets last week - against  Gaddafi have been applauded by virtually all factions here,  the two sides have disagreed strongly over what, if any,  military measures should be taken to protect the rebels and  their civilian supporters and under what circumstances. The hawks have gone so far as to suggest the insertion of  U. S.  Special Forces to train and fight alongside the rebels  in a repeat of Washington's campaign against the Taliban in  late 2001, while others have called on Washington to at  least begin supplying insurgents with the arms they need to  defend themselves, if not retake the offensive. The most commonly discussed measure, however, has been the  imposition of an NFZ, similar to the one imposed against  Saddam Hussein over Iraqi Kurdistan from 1992 to 2003, that  would prevent Gaddafi from using warplanes to bomb rebel  positions or the civilian population.  With growing urgency,  rebel leaders have called for such a move, as has the Gulf  Cooperation Council (GCC). But even while insisting they are planning for such a  contingency, senior officials have argued, as Clinton did  Thursday, that such an NFZ would be relatively ineffective,  because most of the killing in Libya has been carried out by  ground troops and low-flying helicopters.  Senior Pentagon officials, including Defence Secretary  Robert Gates, have been particularly scornful of the idea  not only because of its doubtful effectiveness, but also  because the deployment of 'the U. S.  military in another  country in the Middle East' would further strain an already- overstretched force and risk a regional backlash. Despite growing pressure by neo-conservative and liberal  hawks, the administration clearly hopes that a direct  military commitment of the kind required by an NFZ will not  be necessary.  Indeed, at a closed meeting of NATO defence  ministers in Brussels Thursday, Gates, joined by his German  counterpart, repeated his reservations, according to reports  which said that no consensus on anything beyond the delivery  of humanitarian assistance and enforcement of the arms  embargo had been reached To the great frustration of neo-conservatives, in  particular, the administration has also made clear that it  will not take unilateral action — least of all, military  action — without a strong regional, if not international,  consensus behind it.  Most independent analysts here have predicted that an NFZ -  or any other military action - is unlikely to be approved by  the U. N.  Security Council, given the almost certain  opposition of veto-wielding Russia and China.  Council  members Turkey and Brazil have also publicly objected to the  proposal. As a result, the administration is looking for both guidance  and support from regional organisations, including the EU,  which holds an emergency summit Friday, the Arab League,  which meets Saturday in Cairo, and the African Union which  has been meeting since Thursday in Addis Ababa. 'We do seek regional support; this is really important,'  said Donilon.  'And it’s not just regional rhetorical  support.  We're going to be seeking actual support by those  nations - the Arab League, the GCC and the African nations -  to participate in any of these efforts as they go forward.   Again, not just rhetorical support, but actual  participation, which we think is absolutely critical. '*Jim Lobe's blog on U. S.  foreign policy can be read at  http://www. lobelog. com. 