Afghanistan's historic Bamiyan Buddhas, destroyed by the  Taliban 10 years ago, will not be reconstructed despite claims  the 1,500-year-old statues could be repaired, the United  Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organisation  (UNESCO) said Thursday. The decision follows a two-day meeting of scientists, Afghan  officials and donors in Paris last week. While the expert panel was split on the possibility of  reconstruction, UNESCO has told the Afghan government it  does not support a rebuild project, citing concerns over  funding priorities and authenticity. Replicating the colossal monuments, which once stood 55 and  38 metres tall, could cost between eight and 12 million  dollars.  However, less than half of the original stone used  to build the statues remains. 'We think any reconstruction will essentially be a fake  because of lack of original material,' UNESCO's assistant  director-general for culture, Francesco Bandarin, told  reporters at a special conference in New York. 'We have to think of the public, and they don't need to see  a fake, they need to see the reality.  And these statues have  been destroyed.  As much as we mourn that they have been  destroyed it's an historical fact,' he added. The Bamiyan Buddhas, dating from the sixth century, were  bombed in 2001 as part of the Taliban's campaign to rid  Afghanistan of pre-Islamic structures. While much of the statues was reduced to dust, a group of  German scientists, led by Professor Erwin Emmerling of the  University of Munich, has said the smaller of the two could  be restored. The scientists have spent years studying the Buddhas, by  analysing the hundreds of exploded fragments currently  stacked in warehouses in the Bamiyan Valley. According to Emmerling, a reconstruction project could be  feasible using the original stone, but there would be  practical considerations.  Either a small factory would have  to be built in the valley, or the 1,400 rocks weighing up to  two tonnes each would need to be transported to Germany. The scientists' proposals, however, have not been accepted  by Afghan President Hamid Karzai and his government, which  has indicated it will not go ahead with restoration. The decision has drawn strong criticism from Afghanistan's  Hazara community, a minority ethnic group that claims a long  association with the Bamiyan Valley and views the Buddha  statues as a source of pride. The international advocacy organisation Hazara People said  the consensus to not rebuild was 'shameful'. The group believes the decision is politically influenced  and reflects the continued discrimination aganst Hazara  peoples in Afghanistan. 'We are not surprised the Afghan government does not want to  rebuild the Bamiyan Buddhas,' a spokesperson, who did not want to be named, told  IPS.  'Bamiyan Buddhas are great proof that say Hazara people  have been living in that area for thousands of years. 'Hazaras have long faced violence in Afghanistan, suffering  genocide, slavery, and forced displacement under a series of  governments including the Taliban. And while the ethnic group is predominately Muslim, their  East Asian appearance bears a resemblance to monuments such  as the Bamiyan Buddhas. 'Afghan regimes have had this policy to destroy all historic  symbols of Hazaras,' the spokesperson continued.  'The (19th  century) Afghan/Pashtun king Abdurrahman has destroyed the  face of Buddha in Bamiyan.  It was very simple, he didn't  want Buddha's face like Hazara's face. 'The group rejected the argument that there was a lack of  funding for restoration, pointing to the Karzai government's  recent willingness to financially support the reconstruction  of Pashtun poet Rahman Baba's bombed shrine in Pakistan. 'But the same government didn't pay one dollar for the  Bamiyan Buddhas,' the spokesperson told IPS. 'The expenses of a few projects in Bamiyan have been covered  by some international donors.  Furthermore, eight to 12  million dollars is nothing compared to billions of dollars  in aid to Afghanistan…eight to 12 million dollars is nothing  compared to a million dollars corruption by Afghan senior officials. 'While acknowledging there was desire to see the Buddhas  rebuilt, UNESCO believes priority should now be placed on  preserving the wider Bamiyan Valley, a World Heritage-listed  site containing treasured Buddhist art and monastic caves  dating to the first century. The organisation, which has already conducted extensive  consolidation of the ancient niches where the statues once  stood, has called for construction of a central museum in  Bamiyan, in addition to smaller site museums within the  area. 'The priority now is creating the capacity to conserve what  is there and ensuring the security of the site, in order to  have it open for tourism,' Bandarin said. 