As it projects its political and economic power in Asia - and  vigorously pushes its longstanding claims for a permanent  seat in the United Nations Security Council - India is also  steadily strengthening its military might in the sprawling  continent. According to the latest figures released Monday by the  Stockholm International Peace Research Institute (SIPRI),  India has regained its position as the world's largest  single purchaser of military equipment. As a result, India ranks ahead of traditional buyers in Asia  and the Middle East, including China, Saudi Arabia,  Pakistan, South Korea, Israel, Egypt and the United Arab  Emirates. Asia still leads the way, says Siemon Wezeman, senior fellow  at SIPRI's Arms Transfers Programme, pointing out that India  received nine percent of the volume of international arms  transfers during 2006-2010. The primary source was Russia, with deliveries from Moscow  accounting for 82 percent of Indian arms imports.  The four largest arms importers in 2006-2010 are located in  Asia: India (nine percent of all imports), China (six  percent), South Korea (six percent) and Pakistan (five  percent).  These states have imported, and will continue to  take delivery of, a range of major conventional weapons, in  particular combat aircraft and naval systems, according to  SIPRI. Asked why India is on an arms-buying spree, Wezeman told  IPS, 'As usual with defence policies and procurement there  are several drivers. 'For India, the most important one seems still to be the  perceptions of threats from Pakistan and China, he said,  noting, 'The Pakistani connections to the November 2008  Mumbai terrorist attacks have only increased the perception  of Pakistan as a threat. 'The Chinese potential threat, on the other hand, has gained  importance in recent years, both on the northern border and  in the Indian Ocean. Ambitions of regional and global leadership - and the  competition with China for Asian leadership - also play a  role, he added. 'It seems such ambitions need to be supported by at least a  show of military power,' as with countries such as Brazil,  South Africa and others, he noted. At the United Nations, both South Africa and Brazil, along  with India and Germany, are continuing their relentless  campaign for four new permanent seats in the Security  Council. India has a 1. 2-million-strong military and an annual  defence budget of over 20-25 billion dollars.  Of this, about  9. 2 billion dollars is earmarked for the army, 5. 6 billion  dollars for the air force and 3. 4 billion dollars for the  navy. China has an annual military budget of over 90 billion  dollars, according to official estimates.  But unofficial  figures are far above the estimated official statistics  released by the Beijing government. In contrast, the United States, with the world's largest  single military budget, will be spending over 660 billion  dollars on defence this year. Wezeman said there is also a feeling in India that  modernisation is long overdue and that new weapons just to  replace outdated weapons must be acquired quickly to prevent  a serious decline in Indian military strength - and a change  in the balance of power with Pakistan and China. But modernisation has been delayed by the huge bureaucratic  inertia in India and by unrealistic expectations of being  able to develop indigenous weapons. And many plans have in the last decade been delayed for  years and funds earmarked for procurement have been returned  to the treasury because no decisions had been made on  contracts, he added. Lastly, of course, said Wezeman, India has seen strong  economic growth which makes it possible to pay for increased  procurement.  According to the SIPRI report, India is the  number one importer for the five-year period 2006-2010. Between 1999-2003 and 2005-2009, India was number two for  each subsequent five-year period. The last time India held the number one position was during  1988-1992.  And between 1998-2002 and 2005-2009, China was  the global leader. Asked about India's thriving domestic arms industry, Wezeman  told IPS the 'extensive' local industry is geared to meet  domestic needs but has been rather spectacular in failing to  do so.  While ideas of producing 70 percent of Indian needs  locally have been floated for ages, he said, the actual  achievement has never been over 30 percent. As an arms exporter, India is almost non-existent - for the  period 2006-2010, India ranks 34 and accounted for less than  0. 1 percent of the total volume of transfers.  India's  exports of newly produced major weapons consisted of a few  Dhruv helicopters and a patrol craft, he said. In addition, some of India's surplus weapons have been sold  or donated. There is no indication that exports of weapons and  equipment, not included in SIPRI data, are much more  impressive, he declared. 