With Libyan government forces advancing towards the rebel  capital of Benghazi, the time for possible military  intervention by the U. S.  and its NATO or other allies appears  to be running short. Nonetheless, discussion of possible military action  continued apace Monday, with Libya topping the agenda of a  foreign ministers' meeting of the Group of Eight in Paris  and the U. N.  Security Council meeting behind closed doors  late Monday to take up an unprecedented appeal by the Arab  League to impose a no-fly zone over parts of Libya. U. S.  Secretary of State Hillary Clinton was also scheduled  to meet late Monday in Paris with envoys from the  provisional government established in Benghazi who were  expected to press her both for formal diplomatic recognition  and for immediate U. S.  military assistance in the form of a  no-fly zone over the eastern part of the country. Meanwhile, President Barack Obama, in a brief White House  appearance with visiting Danish Prime Minister Lars Lokke  Rasmussen, reiterated that Libyan leader Moammar Gaddafi  'needs to leave' but gave little hint as to whether  Washington supports a no-fly zone or other military steps to  protect the rebel government or reverse the current tide of  battle. '(I)t's going to be very important for us to look at a wide  range of options that continue to tighten the noose around  Mr.  Gaddafi and apply additional pressure,' he told  reporters.  'And so we will be continuing to coordinate closely both  through NATO as well as the United Nations and other  international fora to look at every single option that's  available to us in bringing about a better outcome for the  Libyan people,' he said. The day's events came amid a remarkably vigorous public  debate here over whether and, if so, how Washington should  intervene militarily in the nearly four-week-old conflict in  Libya, even as Gaddafi's forces appeared to make substantial  gains in their eastward drive against the rebels. Over the weekend, government forces, using tanks, infantry,  and helicopters, reportedly retook Zawiyah, near Tripoli,  and laid siege to Misurata, the only other western city that  remained in rebel hands late last week.  At the same time,  they reportedly secured the critical oil refinery town of  Ras Lanuf and captured most of Brega, 110 kms to the east.  On Monday, residents of Ajdabiya reported that their city,  located only about 160 kms from Benghazi, had come under  attack by air and by artillery. The speed of the Gaddafi forces' advance and the apparent  inability of the rebels to resist the regime's superior  firepower have underlined for analysts here how little time  may remain for any effective intervention on the part of  foreign powers. 'It seems to me that the debate that is taking place here  may soon be moot in that Gaddafi's forces seem to be taking  back ground at a rate that may make it too late for the  international community to really turn the tide,' according  to Charles Kupchan, a foreign policy expert at the Council  on Foreign Relations (CFR). Nonetheless, that debate, which began in earnest when it  became clear that Gaddafi, unlike Tunisian President Zine El  Abidine Ben Ali and Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak, was  determined to deploy military force against popular demands  for his ouster, has continued to rage among elite sectors  here, even as the aftermath of Friday's earthquake and  tsunami in Japan has diverted the attention of the mass  media from Libya. Like the controversy in the 1990s over U. S.  intervention in  the Balkans, the debate has generally pitted hawkish neo- conservatives and liberal interventionists on the one hand  against foreign policy 'realists' and some regional  specialists on the other. Among the most-recent entries on the interventionist side  have been former President Bill Clinton, who came out in  support of a no-fly zone at a women's conference in New York  late last week; former President George W.  Bush's deputy  defence secretary, Paul Wolfowitz; and Hillary Clinton's  recently departed policy planning chief, Princeton  University Prof.  Anne-Marie Slaughter. In a New York Times op-ed published Monday, Slaughter  charged the Obama administration and the European Union (EU)  - which, while calling on Gaddafi to resign, failed to agree  on a common position on military action at a Friday summit  in Brussels - with 'temporising on a no-flight zone'.  If the Security Council failed to authorise one, she went  on, Washington should recognise the rebel regime in Benghazi  as the legitimate government, as France and Portugal did  last week, and work with the Arab League to give it any aid  it requests. But the realists, including Gen.  Wesley Clark (ret. ), who  commanded NATO's 1999 Kosovo campaign under Bill Clinton,  have expressed scepticism, noting that a no-fly zone or even  the provision of direct military aid could become a  'slippery slope' into a much bigger intervention that  Washington can ill afford given its ongoing commitments in  Iraq and Afghanistan and the possibility of a regional  backlash. 'A no-fly zone in Libya may seem straightforward at first,  but if Gaddafi continues to advance, the time will come for  airstrikes, extended bombing and ground troops — a stretch  for an already overcommitted force,' Clark wrote in the  Washington Post Sunday. 'If we're serious about doing things to give the rebels a  real chance of defeating and toppling Gaddafi, it will take  much more than grounding the Libyan air force, and halfway  measures could do more harm than good,' Kupchan agreed. 'I think that caution appears to be prevailing on both sides  of the Atlantic, and that the voices in favour of  intervention are significant but thus far losing the  debate,' he noted, adding the Arab League's endorsement,  while significant, would not itself tip the balance in  either Washington or Brussels unless Arab states are willing  to offer more than political and diplomatic support to  military action. Perhaps the strongest argument made by the interventionists  — or at least the one with the greatest political resonance  here — is that Gaddafi's victory could reduce or even  reverse the momentum of the pro-democracy movement that has  swept across the Arab world over the past two months.  'If he survives, the virus of repressive bloodshed and  unyielding autocracy could flow back through the region,'  noted Washington Post columnist Jackson Diehl, and Kupchan  conceded it would constitute a 'definite setback for the  democracy movement'. But Obama, even while he has repeatedly called for Gaddafi's  ouster, has already shown some ambivalence toward opposition  movements, particularly in Bahrain and Yemen where U. S. - backed leaders have been fending off popular demands for  radical reform for several weeks. 'Confronted with conflicting advice on what to do, the final  coin thrown into the balance on the side of inaction on the  part of the White House might have been that doing nothing  in this case would quite possibly reduce the boldness of  reformists, oppositionists, etc.  more generally,' according  to Wayne White, a former senior State Department Middle East  analyst.  'The U. S.  is, after all, largely a status quo  power. '