As the White House and its partners in the international  community inch closer to a decision over military action in  Libya, while Muammar Gaddafi's forces advance steadily into  rebel-controlled territory, some analysts argue that the  intervention debate is nearing irrelevance after raging  unabated for almost a month. Up to now, Washington has engaged in fence-sitting, while  its G8, NATO and United Nations Security Council allies have  been divided over the knotty no-fly zone (NFZ) issue — even  after endorsements by the Arab League, the Gulf Cooperation  Council, Libya's National Transitional Council and the  Organisation of the Islamic Conference.  'It seems to me that the debate may soon be moot in that  Gaddafi's forces seem to be taking back ground at a rate  that may make it too late for the international community to  really turn the tide,' explained Charles Kupchan, a foreign  policy expert at the Council on Foreign Relations (CFR), in  an interview with IPS. The strongman's loyalists are setting their sights on the  opposition-stronghold of Benghazi and his son, Saif Gaddafi,  predicted its fall within 48 hours, according to a televised  interview he gave to France-based Euronews on Wednesday. Meanwhile, the U. N.  Security Council convened behind closed  doors for the third day in a row on Wednesday to confer on  the situation in Libya — this time meeting over a France,  Lebanon and Britain co-sponsored draft resolution that  invokes the council's Chapter VII enforcement powers. Key outstanding issues reportedly revolve around the breadth  and depth of military action — such as if and how airstrikes  should be used to protect civilians and whether all or just  military flights should be grounded. With reservations from seat-holder Germany and veto-wielding  China and Russia, the resolution remains up in the air.  U. S.   Secretary of State Hillary Clinton told reporters in Cairo  that a vote is hoped for 'no later than' Thursday. '[W]e do think that among the actions that have to be  considered by the United Nations, the no-fly zone is one of  them, but it's not the only one,' Clinton said in an  interview with NBC on Wednesday.  'There are other actions  that need to be also evaluated.  And we are putting  everything on the table. 'Some analysts are also pushing for alternatives - if not  compliments - to a NFZ, such as imposing more restrictive  sanctions on the Gaddafi regime, arming the opposition —  with weapons and intelligence, and jamming Gaddafi's  communication systems. 'All of these measures would have a lighter footprint than  ships, planes, bombs, and other weapons systems that would  remind and brand this revolution as delivered by Western  forces,' argued Steve Clemons, foreign policy analyst for  the New America Foundation who is against direct military  action, in his blog 'The Washington Note' on Monday. 'As urgently as they want the international community to  come to the aid of the Libyan people, the U. S.  would be  better served focusing on rapid moves toward non-military  means of supporting the Libyan opposition,' echoed Middle  East analyst Marc Lynch in his 'Foreign Policy' blog  Tuesday. Lynch, once among the proponents of a Libyan NFZ — who  include former U. S.  president Bill Clinton, recently  departed U. S.  State Department policy planning chief Anne- Marie Slaughter, France and the UK — has joined the likes of  U. S.  Defence Secretary Robert Gates, European Union foreign  minister Catherine Ashton, Italy and Turkey in cautioning  against such a move. 'Any direct American military presence in Libya would be  politically catastrophic, even if requested by the Libyan  opposition and given Arab League cover,' he wrote from an  Al-Jazeera-sponsored forum in Doha, which Clemons also  attended. Others continue to push for military involvement, with some  advocating for action of a different stripe: namely, a task  that is 'more no-drive zone than no-fly zone using strikes  on the coast roads to confine the movement of Col.  Gaddafi's  mobile columns within designated areas,' proposed former  U. S.  State Department official Philip Zelikow. '[N]either sanctions nor a no-fly zone may suffice,' he  argued in the 'Financial Times' on Wednesday, pushing for  more aggressive measures given the tide-turning momentum of  pro-regime forces.  'Gaddafi has hoarded cash and supplies  for this very contingency. 'Meanwhile, the U. S.  remains wary of taking the lead lest it  finds itself in yet another military quagmire in the region  — a risky move, some critics argue, as passivity puts U. S.   influence and standing on the line. '[U]nilateral action would not be the best approach,'  Clinton said.  'It would have all kinds of unintended  consequences. ''The Arab countries, with their statement through the Arab  League last Saturday, made it very clear that they wanted to  see action, so we need Arab leadership and Arab  participation in whatever the U. N.  decides to do,' she  stressed. The Barack Obama administration has been unwavering in its  message that no options are off the table in the case of  Libya and that whatever path is taken must be in concert  with the international community. But after successfully imposing targeted sanctions and  referring the situation to the International Criminal Court  in a U. N.  Security Council resolution along with its world  allies some three weeks ago, the White House — along with  the international community — seems to have been frozen  since, gripped by NFZ deliberations and stalled by  prerequisites like Arab League approval. '[I]t is time to recognise that there are things we can do  immediately and with a small footprint that help those who  want to get rid of Gaddafi,' Clemons argued.  'These steps  would be welcomed by the Arab League, who want to see order  return to the region and who also want to see Gaddafi moved  out. '