The number of civilians killed in U. S.  Special Operations  Forces (SOF) raids last year was probably several times higher  than the figure of 80 people cited in the U. N.  report on  civilian casualties in Afghanistan published last week, an IPS  investigation has revealed. The report also failed to apply the same humanitarian law  standard for defining a civilian to its reporting on SOF  raids that it applied to its accounting for Taliban  assassinations. The Mar.  9 report, produced by the Human Rights unit of the  United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)  jointly with the Afghanistan Independent Human Rights  Commission (AIHRC), said a total of 80 civilians were killed  in 'search and seizure operations' by 'Pro-Government  Forces' in 2010.  But AIHRC Commissioner Nader Nadery told IPS the figure  represented only the number of civilian deaths in night  raids in the 13 incidents involving SOF units that the  Commission had been able to investigate thoroughly.  Nadery said the AIHRC had received complaints from local  people alleging civilian casualties in 60 additional  incidents involving raids and other activities by Special  Forces.  'We did not include them in the report, because we  were unable to collect the exact figures for casualties,  which takes time,' Nadery said.  The AIHRC is continuing to investigate those 60 events,  according to Nadery, and will report on the results in the  future. The Mar.  9 report refers to '60 incidents of night raids  that caused civilian casualties', but does not inform the  reader that only a fraction of the total casualties alleged  in those incidents were counted in the total.  At least one of the 13 incidents investigated by the AIHRC  was an air strike called by an SOF unit.  The 80 deaths from  at most 12 incidents or less would suggest an average of at  least seven civilians killed per incident.  If the sample of  night raids investigated is representative of the total of  60 incidents of SOF night raids about which civilian  casualty complaints were generated, the total number of  civilians killed would be around 420.  The UNAMA-AIHRC report shows a total 406 assassinations of  civilians by 'Anti-Government Elements' reported for 2010. But the UNAMA-AIHRC report uses a strict humanitarian law  definition of 'civilian' in regard to victims of  assassination by 'Anti-Government Elements' which was not  applied to victims of U. S.  night raids.  'If Afghan soldiers  travelling from one place to another, on holiday, with no  weapon and no uniform, are killed, we count them as  civilians, and the same with policemen,' Nadery told IPS.  Mayors and district chiefs, who participate in military  planning with NATO military commanders, were also considered  as civilian victims of assassination, according to Nadery. A large proportion of those killed as 'Taliban' in SOF night  raids, however, would also qualify as civilians under this  definition.  Matthew Hoh, formerly the senior U. S.  foreign service  officer in Zabul province before his 2009 resignation, was  familiar with the target list for SOF kill or capture raids.   He told IPS the list included Afghans holding every kind of  non-combat function in the Taliban network, including  propagandists and workers who make Improvised Explosive  Devices (IEDs).  UNAMA team leader Denise Lifton conceded that the report had  made no effort to ascertain what positions had been occupied  by those who had been killed in U. S.  raids.  'We have not  looked at the functions, per se, of those [who are] accused  of being Taliban and are killed,' she said in an e-mail to  IPS. Night raids generally kill Taliban personnel in their own  homes, and thus outside the context of a military operation.   If the same humanitarian law criterion used in counting  victims of Taliban assassinations were applied to the  alleged Taliban targeted in SOF night raids, the victims of  killings during those raids would have to be considered as  civilian casualties. U. S.  Special Operations Forces acknowledge only 38 civilian  casualties, including killed and wounded, as a result of  night raids, as reported by Reuters Feb.  24.  Sunset Belinsky, a spokesperson for the International  Security Assistance Force (ISAF), insisted in an e-mail to  IPS that such raids are 'intelligence driven', and that  'there is a rigorous process involved in identifying  targets'. But although Belinsky acknowledged to IPS last September  that the total of 1,355 insurgents 'captured' in the raids  from May through July 2010 included 'suspected insurgents',  she was unable to provide any figures on how many of those  1,355 had later been released.  Belinsky did not respond directly to a request from IPS this  week for the information on what proportion of insurgents  captured in 2010 had turned out not to be insurgents.  The  continued refusal of ISAF, under the command of Gen.  David  Petraeus, to release that information suggests that it would  reveal a very high proportion of the several thousand  Afghans killed last year as 'Taliban' were simply civilian  supporters or victims of misidentification or a malicious  intelligence tip. The remarkably sharp rise in the number night raids carried  out by Gen.  Stanley McChrystal, ISAF commander until June  2010 - and the even more spectacular increase in the raids  under Petraeus - in 2010 raises serious questions about how  the U. S.  military could avoid a massive increase in the  killing of individuals with non-military functions in the  Taliban as well as people with only tangential or no  connection to the insurgency.  According to a document from the Afghanistan war logs  released by Wikileaks last July, In October 2009, the target  list for SOF night raids, called the Joint Prioritized  Effects List (JPEL), included 2,058 names.  That list  provided the intelligence basis for a pace of some 90 raids  per month in late 2009 — a huge increase from the 20 per  month just six months earlier.  Significantly, at that moment, Gen.  Petraeus was warning the  White House against a strategy of relying on more SOF raids  and a smaller conventional force footprint.  'There's just a  limit to how many precise targets you have at any one  time…,' Petraeus said, according to the account in Bob  Woodward's book 'Obama's Wars'.  But from May through July 2010, according to ISAF figures,  SOF units launched 3,000 night raids — a 50-fold increase  over the rate of only a year earlier — in which they  reported killing nearly 1,100 Taliban 'leaders' and 'rank  and file'.  A 10-fold increase in raids, which implied a similar  increase in the size of the target list, could not have been  carried out without a dramatic relaxation of the already  very loose criteria for including someone on the JPEL,  according to Matthew Hoh.  'Commanders are under pressure to find targets for these  raids, because it has become a metric of success,' Hoh told  IPS.  He likened that broadening of the targeting criteria to  the CIA's getting much greater latitude on targeting of  drone strikes in Northwest Pakistan in early 2008, expanding  the target list from a handful of al Qaeda leaders to  virtually anyone tangentially associated with either al  Qaeda or the Taliban. Hoh said one result of the frantic effort to expand the  target list is bound to be an increased use of intelligence  tips from individuals or tribal enemies. That appears to have been a factor in the killing of  President Hamid Karzai's cousin, Yar Mohammad Karzai, in a  night raid in the Karzai ancestral home in Kandahar  province, Mar.  9.  The raiders also took his son away with a  black bag over his head.  Yar Mohmmad Karzai had told relatives repeatedly over the  years that he feared that another cousin of the president's,  Hashmat Karzai, who had headed a large security firm for  years and then ran unsuccessfully for parliament, would seek  to arrange for a U. S.  attack against him by planting false  information with the Americans. *Shah Noori reported from Kabul.  Gareth Porter is an  investigative historian and journalist specialising in U. S.   national security policy.  The paperback edition of his  latest book, 'Perils of Dominance: Imbalance of Power and  the Road to War in Vietnam', was published in 2006. 