As Libyan leader Muammar el-Gaddafi's fighter planes and  helicopters continue to mercilessly pound civilians and rebel  groups inside Libya, the U. N. 's most powerful political body  voted to militarily intervene in the besieged North African  country in an attempt to prevent and neutralise the attacks. The resolution, which was adopted Thursday by a vote of 10- 0, called not only for an 'immediate cease-fire' but also  the establishment of a 'no-fly zone' in Libyan airspace,  thereby threatening the country's heavily-equipped air  force. Armed mostly with Soviet-made Sukhoi Su-24 and MiG-25  fighter bombers, French-supplied Mirages and Aerospatiale  helicopters, the air force is expected to come under attack  by fighter planes largely from the United States and the  North Atlantic Treaty Organisation (NATO). In Thursday's vote, five countries in the 15-member Security  Council decided to abstain: China, Russia, India, Brazil and  Germany. Any contemplated military action by the international  community will be taken with the blessings of the secretary- general of the United Nations Ban Ki-moon and the secretary- general of the League of Arab States Amr Moussa. The 22-member League of Arab States has already adopted a  resolution calling for a no-fly zone over Libya. As a result, Arab states are also expected provide fighter  planes to enforce the no-fly zone against another Arab  state: a rare occurrence. The Security Council resolution adopted Thursday was a  'powerful response to the call from the League of Arab  States', Susan Rice, U. S.  ambassador to the United Nations,  told delegates. The resolution authorises the 192 member states to 'take all  necessary measures' - a euphemism for military intervention  - to protect civilians and populated areas under threat of  attack, including Benghazi, which is on the verge of falling  into the hands of Gaddafi's forces. The resolution, which excludes the deployment of an  'occupation force' inside Libya, also 'deplores the  continuing flow of mercenaries' hired by Libya, mostly from  African countries. Ban has also taken a strong stand criticising Libya's  violent reaction against civilian demonstrators.  He warned  against an attack on the rebel-held city of Benghazi which  could endanger a huge number of civilians. 'The secretary-general is gravely concerned about the  increasing military escalation by government forces, which  include indications of an assault on the city of Benghazi,'  U. N.  spokesman Martin Nesirky told reporters. Ban also cautioned against the campaign to bombard an urban  centre which would 'massively place civilian lives at risk'. French Foreign Minister Alain Juppe told delegates there is  very little time to act.  'It's a matter of hours, not days,'  he said, as Libya prepared to attack civilians in Benghazi. 'We cannot abandon civilians who are victims of brutal  repression,' he said. Juppe said France and other countries are ready to put into  action the resolution of the Security Council. 'It's very important that Arab countries become involved in  the intervention when it takes place,' he noted. Hours before the resolution was adopted, Human Rights Watch  (HRW) said the international community, and especially the  Security Council, has a responsibility to use necessary and  appropriate measures to protect civilians from large-scale  atrocities. 'The possible capture of Benghazi heightens concerns of more  abuses as we've seen elsewhere in Libya, including killings  and disappearances,' HRW said in a statement released  Thursday. Sarah Leah Whitson, HRW's Middle East and North Africa  director, said: 'The world should not ignore the serious  abuses by Libyan security forces over the past month, as  well as Gaddafi's demonstrated disregard for human rights  over four decades. 'Since the Libyan uprising began on Feb.  17, Human Rights  Watch has documented cases in which government forces opened  fire on peaceful protesters and the arbitrary arrest and  enforced disappearance of scores of people, she added. 