U. S.  President Barack Obama issued an ultimatum to Libyan  leader Muammar Gaddafi on Friday, less than 24 hours after the  United Nations Security Council passed a resolution to 'take  all necessary measures' short of deploying an 'occupation  force'. 'Gaddafi has a choice,' Obama said in a televised statement.   'All attacks against civilians must stop.  Gaddafi must stop  his troops from advancing on Benghazi, pull them back from  Ajdabiya, Misurata, and Az Zawiya, and establish water  electricity and gas supplies to all areas.  Humanitarian  assistance must be allowed to reach the people of Libya. ''Let me be clear, these terms are not negotiable,' he  stressed.  'If Gaddafi does not comply with the resolution,  the international community will impose consequences, and  the resolution will be enforced through military action. 'Meanwhile, Libyan Foreign Minister Moussa Koussa reportedly  declared an immediate cessation of all military operations  on Friday, although opposition forces claimed that shelling  continued despite the ceasefire announcement. 'The United States will not stand idly by in the face of  actions that undermine global peace and security,' Obama  declared.  'I've taken this decision with the confidence that  action is necessary but we will not be acting alone. 'The White House has been unwavering in its message that the  U. S.  response to the situation in Libya, which has witnessed  a descent into near-civil war over the past month, must be  in concert with the international community, despite some  prominent lawmakers' and analysts' calls here for unilateral  military intervention. The president said that he had instructed Defence Secretary  Robert Gates to coordinate contingency plans with his  international counterparts, while Secretary of State Hillary  Clinton will be meeting this weekend with U. S.  allies and  Arab partners on the enforcement of the 10-0 Security  Council resolution. Five countries abstained from Thursday's vote - Brazil,  China, Germany, India and Russia - which perhaps serves as  an indication of who will not participate in the  multilateral coalition that would take action.  Italy and  Turkey, NATO allies, were also early voices against military  intervention in Libya. What seems to have finally turned the tide in the weeks-long  lull after the Security Council's end of February resolution  on Libya, which imposed sanctions and an arms embargo, was  endorsement by the Gulf Cooperation Council, the  Organisation of the Islamic Conference, Libya's National  Transition Council and namely, the Arab League, in the face  of continued attacks against civilians. '[T]he importance of the Arab League's position supporting  robust action in Libya cannot be overstated,' wrote foreign  policy expert John Norris in an analysis for the Washington- based Centre for American Progress.  'We need to keep a close  eye on how this support holds up if allied aerial attacks  against Libya commence and things get messier on the  ground. ' 	 According to Qatar's state news agency, the small Persian  Gulf country announced Friday that it would take part in the  multilateral effort to protect civilians in Libya.  Jordan,  Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates are also said to  be among the countries willing to participate. On the United States' part, 'We will provide the unique  capabilities that we can bring to bear…including enabling  our international allies and Arab partners to enforce a no- fly zone,' Obama said. In the preceding debate over military action in Libya,  critics feared that the U. S.  would be expected to shoulder  the lion's share of any operation.  High-level Pentagon  officials, like Gates and Chairman of the Joints Chief of  Staff Adm.  Michael Mullen, warned that imposing a no-fly  zone was no easy task and would require significant  investment — not just in dollars but also in equipment and  manpower. In interviews with media outlets this week, Clinton stressed  the need for 'Arab leadership and participation' in the  endeavour to contain the Gaddafi regime's violence against  his people. Obama said that Britain and France, in addition to the Arab  League, had already committed to take a central role in  these efforts.  'This is precisely how the international  community should work, as more nations bear both the  responsibility and the cost of enforcing international law,'  Obama said. 