Fracha Begam has been unable to come to terms with the deaths  of her two teenage daughters, killed by unknown gunmen in the  latest incident of violence against women in the Kashmir  Valley. 'I want to know what crime my daughters had committed which  warranted their brutal killing,' Begam demanded.  She never imagined her daughters - Akhtar, 18, and Arifa, 16  - would meet such a fate.  Gunmen barged into their home one  evening in early February, dragged the sisters out and shot  them. Police blamed the militant Lasker-e-Toiba (LeT) for the  death of the sisters, who earned a living working in  neighbours' homes.  The two were killed, the police said,  because militants accused them of being police informers.  But LeT denied responsibility and accused the police of  maligning their reputation.  These two killings are among thousands that have been  attributed to unknown gunmen in Kashmir since Kashmiris  started an armed struggle for independence from Indian rule  in 1989.  During the more than two decades since, it has been women  who have borne the brunt of the conflict, frequently falling  victim to rape, torture, and killings.  Kashmir's chief minister Omar Abdullah, a pro-India leader,  has accused separatists of issuing a 'muted condemnation  statement' on the deaths of Akhtar and Arifa simply because  the suspects were militants.  'Had there been any indication that these killings were the  result of highhandedness of security forces, the whole  Kashmir valley would have erupted in protest,' Abdullah  said.  He was alluding to the mass protests the separatists  spearheaded over the rape and murder of 17-year-old Asiya  Jan and 22-year-old Neelofar in south Kashmir's Shopian  Township in 2009.  The separatists had accused Indian  security forces of involvement in that incident.  But social and political commentator Aijaz-ul-Haq cautioned  both separatists and the pro-India leaders against  'political classification of crime as 'theirs' and 'ours' to  score petty political points. ' 'When human dignity is wounded, let everyone's flag fly at  half mast,' he added.  'What we have been witnessing in  Kashmir is the polarisation of crime which is dangerously  dividing human blood into two colours. 'Social activist Showkat Imran opines that ambiguity has to  be removed and everyone has to be made accountable.  'No act  of violence should go unchallenged and unquestioned,' Imran  said.  Aside from killings, Kashmiri women also face the problem of  sexual violence.  A study by the international non- governmental organisation Medicines Sans Frontiers (MSF) in  2005 revealed that sexual violence in conflict-hit Kashmir  was even graver than in Sri Lanka or Sierra Leone, which had  also been plagued by vicious civil wars. 'Sexual violence has been routinely perpetrated on Kashmiri  women, with 11. 6 percent of respondents saying they were  victims of sexual abuse,' the study said.  Mushtaq Margood, a psychiatrist at Kashmir's only  psychiatric hospital, said women constitute more than 60  percent of the patients coming for treatment, with most of  them suffering from Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD).  The number could even be understated since not all women  seek treatment because of social stigma attached to  psychiatric diseases.  'They prefer to stay in their homes and suffer it silently  rather than listening to the taunts of people,' Margood told  IPS.  Justice continues to elude women victims of violence.  A  probe was ordered into the rape and murder of Asiya Jan and  Neelofar, but their killers have yet to be identified.   Separatists have accused government agencies of covering up  for the culprits who, according to them, were Indian  paramilitary troopers.  Akhtar and Arifa's family has demanded a probe into their  deaths, but so far none has been launched.  Neither have people come to visit her, said Fracha Begam,  because her neighbors fear being the gunmen's next target.  'Because of the same reason, the funeral prayers of my  daughters were attended only by our close relatives,' Begam  said. 