Eleven years ago, 192 countries — all the United Nations  member states — agreed to step up the integration of women in  international peacebuilding and security processes, a promise  that has remained largely unmet. Mavic Cabrera-Balleza notes that by having specific  provisions compelling their members to implement and report  progress, regional organisations like the European Union and  the African Union 'are a step ahead' of the United Nations,  which lacks a regular accountability mechanism. As international coordinator of the Global Network of Women  Peacebuilders (GNWP), consisting of 50 women's and non- governmental organisations (NGOs) from Africa, Asia and the  Pacific, Europe and Latin America, Cabrera-Balleza spoke to  IPS about developments and challenges in supporting women  around the world. Excerpts from the interview follow. Q: Recently you conducted a stock-taking study to look at  the progress made in 11 countries in terms of women's  involvement in national efforts to prevent war and build  peace.  What did you find?  A: One of the biggest problems is what we refer to as the  'accountability gap'.  There is nothing that compels U. N.   member states to report on what they are doing to put  resolution 1325 [on women, peace and security] into  practice, apart from the beautiful statements that they all  say during the open debate in the U.  N.  Security Council  every October.  But that is not an accurate reporting. A second finding of our report is the enduring lack of women 's participation in decision-making, which is also related  to an absence of women in official peace negotiations.  When  negotiations are informal then women are there and  recognised, when they become official and national they  disappear.  The reason is that in these peace negations a  bigger premium is put into parties who had guns or who were  engaged in actual combat.  So it is not because women do not  have anything to contribute, but there are structural  barriers to their participation and that has to be changed. We have also found that women's participation in the justice  and security sector is still very low, in general, across  the 11 countries.  There has been a change in the judiciary,  but not in critical mass, meaning at least 30 percent.  The  security sector — police and military — is still very male  in all the analysed countries.  Women's participation in the  military, for example, was less than nine percent in eight  of the nine countries for which data were provided. Q: Did you find ways to confront these problems?  A: To begin to fill the 'accountability gap' we have been  advocating for the adoption of a general recommendation on  armed conflict for the U. N.  Convention on the Elimination of  All Forms of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW).  The  general recommendation is the CEDAW Committee's  interpretation of state obligations under international  laws. So what will happen if a general recommendation on women and  armed conflicts gets adopted is that member states who have  ratified the CEDAW  — there are around 186 of them — will be  obliged to include in their regular compliance report to the  Committee how they are actually implementing resolution  1325.  And NGOs which are providing or presenting on their  own shadow reports to CEDAW will also more consciously  integrate 1325 implementation, even when they are already do  it.  It will raise their awareness. Q: Some critics say that NGOs and U. N.  agencies are  competing for visibility and resources instead of working  together.   A: This happens a lot, I cannot believe how much it happens.   We [women's groups, civil society organisations and U. N.   agencies] go to the same donors.  What we are encouraging the  U. N.  is that they should not duplicate what NGOs or other  agencies are already doing, but provide the models or  catalytic examples, meaning examples that one can replicate  in other areas.  The world is big, there are many problems.   We should not try all of us working in the Democratic  Republic of Congo or Afghanistan.  There are many places  which need attention. The existing lack of appreciation and the competition is in  some ways driven by the need for visibility and the need to  attract donor's attention to our individual work and not to  our collective work.  And here I would really challenge the  donor community to encourage collective work, partnership  and not just to put their stake on the bigger and more  visible agencies or organisations.  They are accountable to  their constituencies, to their parliaments and to their  congresses, but they should also educate their  constituencies and not just work on one priority country  when there is already presence there. Q: GNWP was part of the NGO executive committee at the 55th  session of the Commission on the Status of Women (CSW),  which just held two weeks of meetings in New York.   What do  you see as the greatest challenges yet to overcome?   A: The CSW remains the only regular global policy discussion  space dedicated to women, there is nothing else.  It brings  in a very good number of participants together, no matter  what the theme is.  I want for the CSW and UN Women, which  serves as a secretariat to the Commission, to realise the  convening and mobilising power of this event.  Unfortunately, there is a persistent procedural or you may  say structural problem with the CSW.  It is not clear where  do the agreed conclusions — which is the main outcome  document at the end of the two-week meeting — actually go  to, how are they influencing other U. N.  policy discussions.  Another persistent problem is the refusal by some U. N.   member states to recognise that gender equality is upfront  and central in any policy discussion.  There is no escaping  it, women are totally part of the equation.  When you are  talking about peace, human rights and development — which  are the major areas of U. N.  work — gender is an integral  component.  There is no meaningful, substantive discussion  that could happen in this policies if do not integrate that.  