When the United Nations Security Council Resolution (UNSCR)  imposing a no-fly zone in the airspace of the Libyan Arab  Jamahiriya passed Thursday by a predicted 10-0, no one stopped  to ask what ends the means of military force hoped to achieve. As the United States and its allies, notably France and  Britain, enter their third consecutive day of ferocious air  strikes against Libyan leader Muammar Gaddafi's ground  controls Monday, this vital question remains unanswered, a  vacuum that is swiftly filling up with fears that the UNSCR  may have left too much wiggle room for powerful Western  states with a notorious track record of invasion and  occupation. Addressing a press briefing at the U. N.  headquarters Monday,  spokesperson for the secretary-general Martin Nesirky  confirmed that the UK, U. S. , Italy, France, Canada, Denmark  and Qatar had all submitted letters to Ban Ki-moon, stating  their intent to attack Gaddafi's compound as his forces  advanced on the rebel stronghold in Benghazi.  These states have wasted no time in taking full advantage of  the resolution's endorsement of 'any means necessary' to  safeguard the rights of the Libyan people. According to The Guardian UK, the velocity of these air  attacks has pushed the Arab League, whose grudging support  for the resolution finally tipped the scales in favor of  intervention, to beat a hasty retreat. Speaking at an emergency convention of the League of Arab  States Sunday, outgoing Secretary General Amr Moussa said  that he had 'agreed to the protection of civilians, not the  bombardment of more civilians'. While the League is yet to announce a formal alternative to  the onslaught by allied warplanes, experts believe its  irresolution bodes badly for U. S.  President Barak Obama, who  has professed 'broad regional support' in fielding  comparisons between the current engagement in Libya and the  2003 invasion of Iraq. Indistinct Language, Incalculable OutcomesThough Resolution 1973 demands the immediate establishment  of a ceasefire and a complete end to violence against  civilians, it makes no mention of Gaddafi's ousting as an  inherent goal of the U. N. -sanctioned intervention. In fact, according to the New York Times, allied air strikes  will likely concentrate Gaddafi's limited forces in defence  of Tripoli, necessitating the strongman's participation in  any subsequent diplomatic solution including a ceasefire —  an outcome that will not be welcomed by the sponsors of  UNSCR 1973. While France quickly stepped in as the chief of operations  in implementing the resolution, cobbling together an  emergency summit of world leaders at the Palace Élysée in  Paris Friday, it is the vociferous officials of the U. S.   defence forces that have expressed the most confusion  regarding the final goals of the resolution. Vice Admiral William E.  Gortney told reporters at a  Washington news conference that the United States is not  interested in killing Gaddafi. 'At this particular point I can guarantee that he's not on a  targeting list,' Gortney said, reiterating that the United  States military was more concerned with weakening the Libyan  state's military capacity. However, he added 'If [Gaddafi] happens to be inspecting a  surface-to-air missile site, and we don't have any idea if  he's there or not, then. . . ', leaving the sentence  unfinished. The chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Admiral Mike  Mullen, stated that the objective of 'removing Gaddafi' was  likely outside the scope of the international offensive,  adding that leaving him in power after the U. S.  military  completed its mission was 'potentially one outcome'. Mullen's words run starkly contrary to Obama and Secretary  of State Hillary Clinton's repeated insistence in the days  leading up to the resolution and in the hours immediately  following its adoption that 'Gaddafi must go', an undeniable  allusion to the U. S. 's vested interested in a regime change,  which is nowhere specified in the text of the resolution. Asli Bali, a law professor at the University of California  Los Angeles Law School, told IPS, 'Ultimately, the tactical  decision to resort to an aerial bombardment campaign against  Libyan forces - including not just air defences but also  targeting of ground forces - and the imposition of a no-fly  zone is difficult to limit logistically to a strategy of  ceasefire unless the international community is willing to  accept a partition of Libya. 'She added, 'If the international community does maintain a  no-fly zone to police a ceasefire, as suggested by the  resolution on its face, then the ceasefire line risks  leaving the opposition forces in charge of the Cyrenaica  region and the Gaddafi regime in control of the rest of the  country, resulting in de facto partition. ''Because none of these strategic goals [withdrawal from  certain areas, partition or regime change] are rooted in the  language of the Security Council resolution, but each seem  connected to the rationale adopted by the sponsors of the  resolution, there is reason to believe that no clear  strategic consensus undergirds the resort to tactical use of  force,' Bali said. 'Since it seems unlikely that any outcome that leaves  Gaddafi in charge of Tripoli will be acceptable to the  sponsors of the resolution but equally that the tactic of  no-fly zone and all necessary measures to protect civilians  will not suffice to remove Gaddafi, the tactic that was  adopted in UNSCR 1973 seems disconnected from any clear  objective on the part of those currently implementing it  through force,' she concluded. 