The fate of Libyan leader Muammar Gaddafi remains up in the  air after the United States and its allied partners began  missile strikes over the weekend to impose a no-fly zone (NFZ)  in the North African country. '[T]he six-million-dollar question is where is this heading  and I don't think we have a clear sense of it,' Charles  Kupchan, U. S.  foreign policy expert at the Council on  Foreign Relations, told IPS. U. S.  President Barack Obama reiterated his prior calls for  regime change in Libya on Monday during a televised press  conference from Chile, the second stop of his three-country  visit to Latin America this week. 'It is U. S.  policy that Gaddafi needs to go,' he said.   'We've got a wide range of tools in addition to our military  efforts to support that policy. ''[W]e will continue to pursue those, but when it comes to  our military action, we are doing so in support of United  Nations Security Council resolution 1973 that specifically  talks about humanitarian efforts, and we are going to make  sure that we stick to that mandate,' Obama continued. While some analysts criticise Washington's military  involvement in Libya, questioning the justification that it  preempts a humanitarian crisis and instead intervenes in a  civil war, others call for Gaddafi's ouster through military  might, arguing that it is permitted under the UNSC  resolution. Top Pentagon officials — like Vice Admiral Bill Gortney,  director of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, and General Carter  Ham, U. S.  Africa commander — have stressed in recent days  that Gaddafi is not among the targets of what the U. S.  is  calling 'Operation Odyssey Dawn. 'Although current military operations in Libya are restricted  to the protection of civilians, U. S.  allies, notably Britain  and France, have also been vocal in calling for regime  change. '[W]hat the U. S. , at this point, is trying to focus  specifically on is humanitarian objectives — that is to say,  to stop the killing of the opposition by Gaddafi's forces —  and is leaving in a more ambiguous state what comes after  that objective,' Kupchan explained. Bombs Over Benghazi'The military mission here…is very clear, frankly, and what  is expected of us to do: to establish this no-fly zone, to  protect civilians, to…get the withdrawal of regime ground  forces out of Benghazi,' Ham reiterated Monday. '[W]e are so far achieving our military objectives  consistent with our mission,' Ham said, adding that U. S.  and  British ships and submarines in the Mediterranean Sea have  launched 136 tomahawk missiles since the start of military  operations on Saturday. According to the general, no Libyan military aircraft has  been observed operating since, Libyan naval activity has  ceased, and pro-regime ground forces have halted their  advance on the opposition-stronghold of Benghazi. '[W]e know that regime ground forces that were in the  vicinity of Benghazi now possess little will or capability  to resume offensive operations,' Ham announced. The U. S.  is leading this initial phase of military  operations, which is aimed at disabling Gaddafi's air  defences and implementing and patrolling a no-fly zone,  which will extend south- and west-ward from Benghazi to  eventually encompass about 1,000 kilometres along the top  third of the country. Subsequent phases, which Obama said will come in a manner of  'days, not weeks', will operate under a coalition  leadership.  Partners active in the operations now include the British,  Danish, French, Italian and Spanish, with Belgian and  Canadian allies beginning to participate on Monday and  Qatari forces en route to the area, Ham said.  Additional countries — including those from the Arab League  — are expected to add their names to the list in the coming  days.  The White House has insisted on 'Arab leadership and  participation' in international efforts to contain Gaddafi's  attacks against his people, with the Arab League's  endorsement of a NFZ in Libya one of the key contributing  factors in the U. S. 's involvement. But Arab support wavered on Saturday, when the League's  Secretary-General condemned the intensity of the missile  strikes.  Then on Sunday, the League issued a second  endorsement of the NFZ. As details of how the coalition leadership will be  structured are defined, it is clear that parties must tread  carefully to accommodate the policies and intentions of the  nations involved. '[T]here are a couple of possibilities — one is British and  French leadership, another is the use of the NATO  machinery,' U. S.  Defence Secretary Robert Gates told  reporters Sunday. 'I think there is a sensitivity on the part of the Arab  League to being seen to be operating under a NATO umbrella,  and so the question is if there is a way we can work out  NATO's command and control machinery without it being a NATO  mission and without a NATO flag and so on. 'Ultimately, Gates said, 'this is basically going to have to  be resolved by the Libyans themselves. '