Libya's pro-democracy fighters have formed an 'interim  government' even as forces backing the country's leader,  Muammar Gaddafi, press ahead with attacks against them. Heading up the new government as an interim prime minister  is Mahmoud Jibril, who had been working as a representative  to foreign powers.  He is best known on the international stage for meeting  Nicolas Sarkozy, the French president, which led to France  diplomatically recognising the rebels' transitional council  as the sole representative of the Libyan people. Opposition spokesman Nisan Gouriani told Al Jazeera: 'The  provisional national council is a legislative body, but we  need an executive body to take control and provide an  administration. 'He said the rebels 'position has been very clear from the  beginning - that Libya is one unit'. 'Our capital is Tripoli and will forever be Tripoli,' he  said.  'We are striving to liberate the western parts of the  country, and Tripoli, and keep the country united.  We would  like to emphasise this over and over again. 'The rebels had been wary of calling their nascent  administration in their Benghazi stronghold an interim  government, seemingly cautious of signifying a split in the  country.  'But they remain committed to one Libya,' said Al Jazeera's  James Bays, reporting from Benghazi.  'They want the people  of Libya to remain united, just without Gaddafi. ''Real heroes'Meanwhile, fierce fighting continued on Wednesday with  forces loyal to Gaddafi attacking rebel positions across the  North African state. Undaunted by air strikes launched by coalition warplanes  aimed at enforcing a no-fly zone, pro-Gaddafi forces pressed  ahead with their assaults on the towns of Misurata, Ajdabiya  and Zintan in the past 24 hours. Pro-democracy fighters ranged against Gaddafi are finding  the going tough.  Mostly outgunned and with little command structure, they  have been left to run sporadic raids against Gaddafi's  troops, before falling back to their original lines. But despite the little headway made by them, a rebel  commander described the men as 'real heroes'. 'They are brave to the point of being suicidal,' Mohamed  Hariri told Al Jazeera. Amid raging fighting, Gaddafi insisted he was 'ready for  battle, be it long or short'. 'We will win this battle,' he said in an address during a  public appearance at his Bab Al-Aziziyah compound in Tripoli  that was the target on Sunday of a coalition missile strike,  Libyan state television reported. He also railed against the coalition forces, saying: 'This  assault . . .  is by a bunch of fascists who will end up in the  dustbin of history. 'Overnight fighting left 14 people dead and 23 injured in  Misurata, pro-democracy fighters told Al Jazeera's James  Bays.  Hospital captured'Gaddafi's forces have now taken over hospital in the town,  and positioned snipers on the roof and tanks outside,' said  our correspondent.  'The rebels are calling for a hospital  ship to be sent in, as they still control the port, and say  that would save many lives, as they now have nowhere to take  their injured. 'More civilian deaths have been reported in Ajdabiya and  elsewhere, and they calling on international powers to  interpret the U. N.  resolution more widely to support them  with further attacks against Gaddafi's troops. 'Al Jazeera's Anita McNaught, reporting from Tripoli, said  anti-aircraft fire erupted overnight over the Libyan capital  for the fourth successive night. 'We've been hearing big noises,' she said.  'We haven't seen  any smoke on the horizon.  People are firing guns in  defiance.  We're in the loyalist heartland here where people  are utterly defiant of the international effort to force  Gaddafi to surrender, as they would see it. ''The anti-aircraft fire has not been as intense [as Monday  night when two naval installations outside the city were  hit].  Perhaps they feel in the immediate neighbourhood that  most of the significant targets have already been hit. 'The AFP news agency reported that at least two blasts were  heard at a distance before the capital's air defences opened  fire. In the previous night's operations, the coalition air  campaign suffered its first loss with the crash of a U. S.   fighter jet in the rebel-held east. Both crew ejected safely. The no-fly zone is intended to protect civilians from attack  by forces loyal to Gaddafi.  The United States announced on  Tuesday that it is shifting its focus to widen the no-fly  zone across the north African country. *Published under an agreement with Al-Jazeera. 