When the Security Council adopted a wide-ranging resolution  last week recommending humanitarian and military action inside  Libya, both U. N.  Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and Arab League  Secretary-General Amr Moussa were assigned key roles in  'coordinating' the implementation of the mandate. The eight-page resolution calls on member states to  'immediately' inform both Ban and Moussa of measures taken  in enforcing the 'no-fly zone' over Libya and also to  'coordinate closely' on measures taken to implement the ban  on flights, including 'to supply a concept of operations'. 'This is probably the first time the head of the U. N.   organisation is participating in the planning of military  operations,' said Chakravarthi Raghavan, a longstanding  journalist who has covered the United Nations both in New  York and Geneva since the 1960s. 'I read through the resolution carefully,' he told IPS, and  'while various nations acting under the mandate to enforce a  no-fly zone and protect civilians are asked to report their  actions to the secretary-general, there are (also) paras  about 'cooperating' with secretary-general. 'But there is nothing in the resolution asking him to  coordinate or plan the military operation, said Raghavan, a  former editor of the South-North Development Monitor in  Geneva. He said 'it is appalling the secretary-general - possibly  electioneering for a second term - should have participated  in the Paris meeting to plan the military operations. 'The logistics of the no-fly zone were finalised in Paris  last week at a meeting of heads of state and foreign  ministers, mostly from the North Atlantic Treaty  Organisation (NATO), along with Ban and Moussa. The relevant operative paragraphs in the resolution have  also given rise to political ambiguity - on the real role of  the U. N.  secretary-general in the no-fly zone operations. 'It remains to be seen whether Ban Ki-moon will actually  function as General Ban, with any influence over real-time  military decision-making,' said Phyllis Bennis, director of  the New Internationalism Project at the Washington-based  Institute for Policy Studies. She said the language of the resolution calls for close  coordination by the governments participating in military  action in Libya, with the secretary general. 'But it remains quite unclear, both from the actual language  of the resolution and from statements of the governments  carrying out the military actions in Libya, what, if any,  the real role of the secretary-general is to be,' she told  IPS. Beyond the calls for governments to 'coordinate with each  other and the secretary-general' on their military actions,  the only specific role assigned to him is to report to the  Security Council what implementation is underway, said  Bennis, author of 'Calling the Shots: How Washington  Dominates Today's U. N. '. Although Ban Ki-moon participated in the Paris meeting that  aimed at coordinating military action, she said, there was  no indication following that meeting the U. N.  chief was  actually playing a substantive role in military decision- making. It may be that his primary role will be in that 'report- back' position, where he will relay to the Security Council  - which of course includes five members who have expressed  varying degrees of opposition to the U. N. -approved military  action in Libya - what the military enforcers are doing,  Bennis added. Given the concern particularly of the Barack Obama  administration to insure U. N.  backing for the military  intervention in Libya, it may be that ensuring the presence  of the secretary-general in Paris is primarily a political  gesture aimed at reminding the world that this U. S. -French- British attack - with the requisite minimal involvement of  other Europeans and, so far in theory, Qatar - does indeed  have the U. N. 's imprimatur, she said. Responding to questions about Ban's role in coordinating the  enforcement of the no-fly zone, U. N.  spokesperson Martin  Nesirky told reporters Monday the first step the secretary- general undertook was to take part in the high-level meeting  in Paris. 'And that was part of the follow-up to the Security Council  resolution,' he said. 'And I am sure when he briefs the Council on his return from  his trip, as he is also expected to do under the terms of  the Security Council resolution, there will be more details  about precisely how this is being coordinated,' said  Nesirky. Pressed further whether the secretary-general was told in  advance of the air strikes on Libya, Nesirky said: 'As you  know, countries are duty-bound under the terms of the  resolution to notify what measures they are taking.  And  those notifications are being received and transmitted to  the Council as they are received. 'The high-level meeting in Paris, he said, 'strikes me as a  fairly clear example of coordinating'. 'And further details of what other mechanisms are in place,  I am sure, will be becoming clear as the days pass, not  least when he briefs the Security Council,' Nesirky added. Bennis told IPS that given the legacy of illegal unilateral  no-fly zones, such as that established by the U. S.  and UK in  Iraq in 1991, which resulted in the deaths of over 700  civilians - and 144 of them documented by the U. N.  in 1999  alone - it is not surprising that keeping the face of the  United Nations front and centre remains a high priority for  the Western countries attacking Libya.  However, Ban's follow-up statements calling for 'an  immediate end to violence by all parties, in accordance with  Security Council resolutions 1970 and 1973, and for the  responsibility to protect civilians' may represent a  potentially important move to reassert the limitations of  the U. N.  resolution. Or at least to remind the Western powers of those  limitations, she said, pointing out that while the  resolution allows the virtually unlimited use of 'all  necessary measures', it does restrict those measures to the  goal of protecting civilians, not for the purpose of  supporting or encouraging or enabling the opposition's own  military efforts. So the statement of the secretary-general could be seen as  distancing his office from the stated regime change goals of  the Western powers - goals that clearly violate the terms of  the Security Council resolution, but which are just as  clearly central to the operative policies of Washington,  Paris and London, Bennis declared. 