As the Barack Obama administration seeks to limit its  involvement in a third Muslim conflict in Libya, efforts are  intensifying to help it find a political solution to the  longest U. S.  war — in Afghanistan. Authors of a new report released Wednesday by the Century  Foundation, entitled 'Afghanistan: Negotiating Peace', said  they consulted extensively with U. S.  officials in carrying  out research and making recommendations. The report's main proposal is to have the U. N.  secretary- general name a 'facilitator' to supervise peace talks among  Afghans and foreign stakeholders in Afghanistan. While no individual was specified, Jim Dobbins, a member of  the task force that produced the report and a former U. S.   top envoy dealing with Afghanistan, suggested three  possibilities: former U. N.  Secretary-General Kofi Annan,  former U. N.  representative to Afghanistan (and Century Fund  task force co-chair) Lakhdar Brahimi, or Staffan de Mistura,  the current head of the United Nations Assistance Mission in  Afghanistan (UNAMA). In fact, de Mistura is already promoting peace talks and  international buy-in to a process initiated by Afghan  President Hamid Karzai.  Appearing Tuesday before the Middle  East Institute, a Washington think tank, he said he had  convened ambassadors from the United States, Afghanistan's  neighbours and other interested parties several times this  year in Kabul in what he called a 'Silk Road' initiative and  hoped to hold a conference in Istanbul later this year to  endorse a 'stability pact' for Afghanistan. Karzai has named a High Peace Council led by former Afghan  president Burhanuddin Rabbani to reach out to ethnic and  tribal leaders throughout the country as well as Taliban  based in both Afghanistan and in Pakistan. UNAMA is supporting the council by providing logistics,  including eight helicopters and three planes, de Mistura  said.  He said the council has traveled outside Afghanistan  to Turkey and Pakistan and also plans a trip to Iran. The 15-member Century Fund task force also traveled widely,  consulting various parties in Afghanistan and Pakistan.   Although Iran did not respond to a request to visit Tehran,  Brahimi met with then Iranian foreign minister Manuchehr  Mottaki outside Iran and there were contacts with Iranian  academics as well, said Jeffrey Laurenti, the Century Fund's  director of foreign policy programmes. An upcoming report by this reporter for another think tank,  the Atlantic Council, recommends both multilateral and  bilateral talks between the U. S.  and Iran to discuss  Afghanistan's political future. Both de Mistura and the Century Fund task force said 'the  time is now' to begin negotiating a political solution  before the U. S.  starts to reverse its military surge in  Afghanistan this summer.  Despite U. S.  gains in reversing the Taliban's resurgence,  the war is at a 'stalemate militarily', said Tom Pickering,  a former U. S.  under-secretary of state and ambassador to  Russia and India who co-chaired the Century Fund task force  with Brahimi.  Pickering said that 'it is time to bring the  threads together' of various initiatives and begin a serious  negotiating process. The U. S.  State Department had no immediate comment on the  report.  Dobbins said, however, that the Obama administration  encouraged the task force and helped set up its appointments  in Pakistan. In a speech before the Asia Society in New York Feb.  18,  Secretary of State Hillary Clinton pledged a 'diplomatic  surge' this year to complement the military offensive and  efforts to accelerate Afghan economic development. 'Both we and the Afghans believe that the security and  governance gains produced by the military and civilian  surges have created an opportunity to get serious about a  responsible reconciliation process, led by Afghans and  supported by intense regional diplomacy and strong U. S.   backing,' she said. On Tuesday, Karzai announced that Afghan forces will take  the lead in ensuring security in three provinces and four  cities in July as the U. S.  surge ends.  The U. S.  is expected  to bring home a limited number of troops this year, down  from a peak of 100,000.  The transition to Afghan security  control is supposed to culminate in 2014, although a U. S.   military presence may continue at Afghan request. The various diplomatic initiatives aim to produce a durable  peace agreement before 2014. The obstacles to a resolution of the conflict are numerous.   The United States has insisted that the Taliban renounce all  ties with al Qaeda, forswear violence and agree to  participate peacefully in Afghan politics under a 2004  constitution — although Clinton made clear Feb.  18 that  these are U. S.  goals and no longer preconditions for  negotiations.  The Taliban has demanded the withdrawal of  foreign forces. Even if these differences can be breached, Afghanistan's  neighbours have historically exacerbated the conflict by  intervening in support of various proxies.  Pakistan and  India, in particular, have regarded the war in Afghanistan  as a zero sum game in which gains for Pakistan-backed  factions mean defeat for Indian interests.  Iran is opposed to a long-term U. S.  military presence on its  borders which could be a staging point for U. S.  attacks on  Iran.  At the same time, Iran does not want a return to power  of the Taliban and would like to stem drug production and  trafficking that has addicted millions of Iranians. The Century Fund report said that 'for all sides, the longer  negotiations are delayed, the higher the price is likely to  be for restoring peace at the end. '