U. N.  Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon brushed aside widespread  speculation that the U. S. -led military attacks on Libya is  part of a much-wider plan with a hidden political agenda: the  ouster of Muammar el-Gaddafi from power. 'We have a very clear objective - and that objective is to  provide protection to civilians and save lives,' he told  reporters Thursday, immediately following a meeting of the  Security Council. Responding to questions from reporters, Ban was however  unequivocal in accusing the Libyan leader of 'killing his  own people'. What the United Nations is trying to do, under the terms of  the Security Council resolution adopted last week, was to  prevent further killings, he added. The resolution was not meant to 'change regime', he said,  stressing the role of the United Nations in resolving a  humanitarian crisis resulting in over 330,000 people fleeing  the country due to violence. In contrast, U. S.  President Barack Obama has repeatedly said  that Gaddafi has lost political legitimacy and has to go -  even as the incessant bombings have targeted his household  compound. When the Security Council adopted its far-reaching  resolution imposing economic and military sanctions on  Libya, all 192 member states were mandated to 'notify'  Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon of their intentions to help  implement the punitive measures against the North African  country. But as of Thursday, only two Arab countries out of 11 member  states - Qatar and the United Arab Emirates - have informed  the secretary-general they were participating in the action  against Libya. The remaining nine - Belgium, Canada, Denmark, France,  Italy, Norway, Spain, the UK and the United States - are  Western nations who are also members of the North Atlantic  Treaty Organisation (NATO). Additionally, NATO has informed the secretary-general of its  decision to begin a collective operation in support of the  arms embargo against Libya, besides its active role in the  military operations to enforce a no-fly zone.  The United States has expressed disappointment that more  Arab nations, including Jordan, Kuwait and Saudi Arabia,  have not joined the notifiers so far. Both Kuwait and Saudi Arabia, who are strong U. S.  allies,  are reportedly peeved that the Obama administration has not  been supportive of Bahrain, a neighbouring Arab country  facing a mass uprising. But Washington has been critical of Bahrain primarily  because of its crackdown on civilian protesters using  military force. Responding to questions, U. N.  spokesperson Martin Nesirky  told reporters that member states were notifying the  secretary-general under the terms of the resolution. But the notifications 'do not necessarily mean they are  taking part in any military action,' he clarified. Briefing the Security Council Thursday, the secretary- general called on the international community to act  collectively to avert a potential larger-scale crisis. 'I expect the international community to continue to  exercise full diligence in avoiding civilian casualties and  collateral damage,' he told the Council, amidst report of  air and missile strikes inside Libya. Ban was critical of the Libyan government, which has  repeatedly claimed a ceasefire but never put it into force.   To the contrary, said Ban, there have been fierce battles in  or around the cities of Ajdabiya, Misratah and Zitan, among  others. 'In short, there is no evidence that Libyan authorities have  taken steps to carry out their obligations under Resolutions  1970 or 1973,' he said. Both resolutions, which were adopted during the last two  weeks, called for a ceasefire and full protection of  civilians.  Ban said he continues to have serious concerns about the  protection of civilians, the abuse of human rights and  violations of international humanitarian law, and the access  of civilian populations to basic commodities and services in  areas currently under siege. He also told the Security Council that Gaddafi's threats  were aired repeatedly on national television. 'Journalists continue to be arrested.  Foreign reporters in  Tripoli told the U. N.  mission about the population's general  state of fear, tight control by the security services, and  instances of arrest and disappearances,' he said.  