As the North Atlantic Treaty Organisation (NATO) prepares to  assume command and control of military operations in Libya  after five days of the United States at the helm, U. S.   President Barack Obama's doctrine of multilateralism is on the  line. '[W]ith America and its president less inclined to act alone  and ever seeking ways to shift the job of keeping the peace  globally to others, this Libya case should be viewed both in  terms of what it means to the situation on the ground in  that warn torn country and as a possible test-case of a new  approach to world affairs — one that Barack Obama would  ultimately like to be able to take credit for leading,'  argued Carnegie Endowment for International Peace scholar  David Rothkopf last week. In the contentious lead-up to intervention, Obama was  unwavering in his message that any U. S.  action would have to  be in concert with the international community.  He  especially insisted on 'Arab leadership and participation'  in military strikes against the North African country, where  more than 330,000 people have been displaced by fighting  between pro-democracy rebels and soldiers loyal to long-time  Libyan leader Muammar Gaddafi. Domestic debate raged about imposing a no-fly zone (NFZ), as  some sceptics warned that U. S.  influence abroad would suffer  if Washington mired itself militarily in yet another Muslim  country. 'With two wars going in Iraq and Afghanistan, with huge  deficits at home, with neo-isolationist voices rising from  the Tea Party and other parts of the political spectrum, you  might have guessed that intervention would not have  occurred,' Charles Kupchan, a senior fellow with the Council  on Foreign Relations (CFR), told IPS.  While allies like France and Britain were early supporters  of military action, Washington was hesitant until the Arab  League's last-minute endorsement.  Then, within days, the  U. S.  helped to negotiate the passage of United Nations  Security Council resolution 1973 authorising an NFZ,  ostensibly to avert mass civilian casualties, and the hawks  triumphed. 'The episode constitutes a victory for liberal  interventionists' and 'a sign of a continuing [domestic]  appetite to expend blood and treasure in crises abroad —  including a crisis like this, which does not pose a direct  threat to the U. S. ,' Kupchan argued. But as Obama's demands for international participation were  met and public opinion polls showed popular support for U. S.   action, the reluctant president was left with little choice,  according to some observers. 'Not only do I think that this is a successful bout of  multilateralism, but I think that the consensus-building  that occurred elsewhere to some extent forced Obama's hand,'  Kupchan added.  'From the beginning, he said he would like other partners to  do more in the world,' he continued.  'In many respects, they  gave Obama what he wanted. 'Writing in his 'Foreign Policy' blog Thursday, Rothkopf  characterised the 'abstainers' of resolution 1973 as being  among the Libyan war's 'victors' — a coalition with the  potential to be an 'alternative to the old trans-Atlantic  alliance'. 'The group, the BRICs [Brazil, Russia, India and China] plus  Germany, may have sat on the sidelines for the vote but by  imagining the outcome had they not done so, their potential  power is made clear,' he argued. 'China and Russia have veto power.  And of the four countries  most likely to join them as Security Council permanent  members in the years ahead, three of them rounded out this  group,' he explained. For some, Washington's late addition to the cacophony of  voices calling for military intervention could be fodder for  American declinists.  For others, it is proof of the  capitol's enduring influence. '[I]f something is going to get done, [the U. S.  is] going to  have to be in the lead,' Max Boot, a neoconservative foreign  policy analyst at CFR, argued Wednesday, expressing  scepticism about the transition to coalition command of  military operations in Libya.  'And we saw that simply with the authorisation at the U. N.   where, you know, Sarkozy, for example, was way out front in  talking about the need to intervene, but it didn't happen  until last week when Obama said, OK, now we're on board,' he  continued. As one of NATO's 28 members and as part of the international  coalition participating in the enforcement of Libya's NFZ  and arms embargo — which now includes Arab League members  Qatar and the United Arab Emirates — the White House says it  will play a mere support role in subsequent phases of the  operation. But, Boot argued, 'we're going to have the biggest say in  terms of what happens no matter how Obama tries to  camouflage it. ''[E]verybody knows we're the top dog here,' he contended.  ' [Obama] can try to be, you know, humble and try to put the  U. S.  in the background as much as possible, but the reality  is we are the number one power in the world. '