Forces loyal to Muammar Gaddafi are resisting an advance by  Libyan rebels towards the embattled Libyan leader's hometown  of Sirte in the fiercest clashes since the start of a sweeping  offensive that has brought a string of coastal towns under  opposition control. The rebels, backed by international coalition air strikes,  have advanced largely unchecked since Friday but claims in  Benghazi, the rebel's eastern stronghold, earlier on Monday  that Sirte had also fallen were premature. Opposition fighters are now engaged in clashes about 100km  east of the city, with pro-Gaddafi forces shelling their  front lines. Fighting is ongoing at Nawfaliya, about 180km east of Sirte,  where opposition forces say they have come upon a heavily  mined road.  Pro-Gaddafi forces have dug into positions near  the front line, and are shelling opposition fighters. Al Jazeera's Hoda Abdel Hamid, reporting from the east of  Nawfaliya, said: 'I've not been able to confirm that there  has actually been an advance in the town itself [Sirte].   They [rebels] managed to get really close to Sirte but they  didn't get in. ''Sirte will not be easy to take,' said General Hamdi Hassi,  an opposition commander from the city of Bin Jawad.  'Now,  because of NATO strikes on [the government's] heavy weapons,  we're almost fighting with the same weapons. ''We're manoeuvring'Fawzi Bukatif, the commander of the Martyr's Brigade, part  of the forces battling Gaddafi, told Al Jazeera: 'We're  manoeuvring . . .  we are starting . . .  we are checking what  kind of forces they have there but we are standing at Hagela  now - almost 100km from Sirte. 'Bukatif said the rebels' progress has been hampered by a  lack of weapons as they rely on 'old Russian weapons'. 'The . . .  problem we have is we have run out of weapons,' he  said. 'You know our weapons are traditional ones; the old ones;  the Russian weapons.  We need ammunition.  We need new  weapons.  We need anti-tanks; we do not have facilities [but]  we have the soldiers left behind by Gaddafi . . . 'If we do have weapons and ammunitions that we need at the  moment, we can move strongly and faster. 'Fresh fighting continued further west in rebel-held  Misurata, where rebels admitted that Gaddafi forces had  gained control of part of the town after days of heavy  fighting and despite air strikes on Saturday by French and  British forces. 'Part of the city is under rebel control and the other part  is under the control of forces loyal to Gaddafi,' a  spokesman told the Reuters news agency. Rebels dismissed reports that a ceasefire had been declared  by the Libyan foreign ministry in Misurata and that anti- terrorism units there had stopped firing at rebel forces. Saddun al-Misrati, a member of the rebels' revolutionary  committee, told Al Jazeera: 'We rubbish this announcement  . . .  Nothing that they say will make a difference on the  ground. 'Nine people were killed overnight by snipers and shelling by  pro-Gaddafi forces, according to a doctor in Misurata, while  a resident told Reuters that 24 people had been wounded in  mortar attacks by government forces. A Libyan government spokesman claimed Misurata had been  liberated. Al Jazeera's James Bays has been following the rebel  offensive, which has seen them claim the towns of Ajdabiya,  Brega, Ras Lanuf and Bin Jawad. Stretched linesSpeaking from Bin Jawad, Bays said it was uncertain where  the frontline was.  People coming along the coastal road from  Sirte said Gaddafi forces were gathered around 60km outside  the city, positioned in trees, our correspondent said. The speed of the rebel advance has stretched lines of  communications and created logistical problems, said Bays.   One problem is a lack of electricity, which means that  petrol pumps do not work. 'At petrol stations they're using plastic bottles on strings  down into the tank below the station to pull up fuel,' said  Bays. The rebels' advance along the coast has triggered exuberant  celebrations in towns along the route such as Ajdabiya with  rebel fighters firing their weapons in celebration. But government forces appear to have been withdrawing their  heavy armour, rather than engaging with the rebels. There were reports on Sunday of a column of military  vehicles, including truck-mounted anti-aircraft guns, seen  leaving Sirte in the direction of Tripoli, accompanied by  dozens of civilian cars carrying families, according to a  Reuters reporter in the vicinity. The opposition's National Council has said it expects a  major battle to occur in the area around Tripoli, as opposed  to at Sirte. NATO commandMeanwhile, international air strikes continued on Monday  with British Tornado aircraft attacking and destroying  Libyan government ammunition bunkers in the Sabha area of  the southern desert, the British defence ministry said. 'Storm Shadow missiles were launched against ammunition  bunkers used to re-supply Libyan government troops attacking  civilians in the north of the country, including Misurata,'  it said in a statement. NATO on Sunday assumed full command of coalition air  operations in Libya. 'We have directed NATO's top operational commander to begin  executing this operation with immediate effect,' Anders Fogh  Rasmussen, NATO's secretary general, said in a statement.   'Our goal is to protect civilians and civilian-populated  areas under threat from the Gaddafi regime. 'The operations will be led by Canadian General Charles  Bouchard, NATO said. Speaking to Al Jazeera, Rasmussen said that NATO was  'impartial' and not picking sides, and that its mandate was  only to prevent violence against civilians. Rasmussen said that NATO's taking authority over the  military intervention would provide 'unity of command'.  He also confirmed that several non-NATO countries would be  contributing to the military effort, but said he would leave  announcements up to individual governments. James Spencer, a Middle East and North Africa defence  analyst, told Al Jazeera that removing Gaddafi from power  was 'not within NATO's purview'. 'If you listen very carefully, the Secretary-General of NATO  has been very clear.  [Intervention] is to protect civilians  against Gaddafi attacks,' he said. *Published under an agreement with Al-Jazeera. 