The announcement by U. S.  Deputy Undersecretary of Defence  Michele Flournoy in Congressional testimony Mar.  15 that the  United States would continue to carry out 'counter-terrorism  operations' from 'joint bases' in Afghanistan well beyond 2014  signaled that President Barack Obama has given up the  negotiating flexibility he would need to be able to reach a peace  agreement with the Taliban leadership. Flournoy's revelation meant that the administration intends  to maintain a long-term troop presence in Afghanistan  regardless of any negotiated settlement with the Taliban, as  a source familiar with internal deliberations on Afghanistan  confirmed to IPS. Given that commitment to the U. S.  military, a U. S.   negotiator or foreign mediator would not be able to propose  a complete U. S. -NATO troop withdrawal in return for a  Taliban commitment to end its armed resistance and cut its  ties with al Qaeda.  That has long been viewed as the core  bargain underlying a potential peace agreement. Months of conversations with Taliban leaders who had been  detained by the Pakistanis last year revealed that the  Quetta Shura, the council of Taliban leadership, was ready  to negotiate a deal, according to a source who has been  thoroughly briefed on those interrogations.  The Taliban informants were in agreement that such a deal  would have to involve complete withdrawal of U. S.  and NATO  forces, the source said.    Ambassador Thomas R.  Pickering and veteran U. N.  diplomat  Lakhdar Brahimi, who co-authored a study on negotiating  peace in Afghanistan published last week, concluded that a  'guaranteed withdrawal of foreign forces…would almost  certainly be part of a deal,' as they wrote in the New York  Times last Tuesday.   Even if the Taliban were to agree to the U. S.  demand for  severing its relationship with al Qaeda, however, the  present administration policy, apparently reached during the  strategic review last December, calls for the United States  to continue to deploy at least Special Operations Forces  (SOF), according to the source familiar with administration  deliberations.  In the event of an agreement with the Taliban, the SOF units  would not target the Taliban but would be used to hunt down  al Qaeda personnel and to ensure that Afghanistan is not a  source of instability in the region, IPS was told.  The same  policy decision also calls for retention of U. S.  airpower at  Bagram Airbase based on the same justification.  Despite the uniform position of Taliban leaders on the  issue, the official assumption underlying the present policy  is that the Taliban would choose to negotiate an agreement  allowing a limited U. S.  military presence in the country,  according to the knowledgeable source.  IPS was told that a  key factor in the administration's calculus is that it would  be relatively easy politically for the United States to keep  SOF units and airpower — as distinct from infantry troops --  in Afghanistan indefinitely. Ironically, SOF units have generated the greatest popular  antagonism to the foreign military presence, because of targeted  raids that have hit the wrong individuals and killed  civilians.  Afghan President Hamid Karzai has called for an  end to U. S.  SOF raids on a number of occasions — most  recently on Nov.  13, 2010. 'They have to go away,' Karzai said of the targeted raids.   'If there is any raid, it has to be done by the Afghan  government within the Afghan law. 'Obama's acceptance of the principle that U. S.  SOF units and  airpower should remain in Afghanistan indefinitely was  apparently part of the strategy adopted officially last  December after being leaked to the New York Times by  Pentagon officials in mid-November. That strategy, presented to the NATO summit meeting in  Lisbon in November, paralleled the Obama administration  strategy in Iraq, which claimed that the phase of U. S.   combat had ended in August 2010 after a transition to Iraqi  responsibility for security, with remaining U. S.  forces  supposedly involved only in training, advising and  supporting the Iraqi forces. The Afghanistan strategy identified the end of 2014 as the  equivalent of the transition to a limited U. S.  role in Iraq.   But it anticipated tens of thousands of troops remaining in  Afghanistan after the transition for purportedly non-combat  roles, just as some 50,000 U. S.  combat troops remained in  Iraq after the transition date.  They have continued to  participate in combat. What was not leaked to the Times in November, however, was  that both SOF units and airpower would remain behind for  combat purposes. Secretary of State Hillary Clinton announced in her Feb.  18  speech that negotiations would begin with the Karzai  government on a new 'Strategic Partnership Declaration',  which she said would 'provide a long-term framework for our  bilateral cooperation in the areas of security, economic and  social development and institution building. ' But she gave  no hint that the administration had already decided to keep  forces and base access indefinitely beyond 2014. The first meeting on that 'Strategic Partnership  Declaration' took place in Kabul Mar.  13-14.  The U. S.  and  Afghan delegations issued a two-paragraph statement that  made no reference to the question of continued U. S.  troops  or access to bases.  That suggested that the discussion was  still at the level of principles and generalities.  In her prepared statement to the Senate Armed Services  Committee Mar.  15, however, Flournoy referred for the first  time publicly to the post-2014 military presence.  'I  anticipate that some U. S.  forces will remain in Afghanistan  in order to train and assist the ANSF (Afghan National  Security Forces) and conduct combat counter-terrorism  operations,' she said.  But someone had also tipped off Senator Joseph Lieberman,  generally considered the most militarist member of the  Senate Armed Services Committee, to ask Flournoy and  Petraeus about what could be one of the most sensitive  aspects of the new policy.  Lieberman asked Flournoy to comment on the possibility of a  'jointly operated system of bases in Afghanistan between us  and the Afghans' after 2014.  That brought an unambiguous  confirmation by Flournoy that the U. S.  was committed to  leaving troops in Afghanistan indefinitely to conduct 'joint  counter-terrorism operations'.  Petraeus likened 'the concept of joint basing, the concept  of providing enablers for Afghan operations and so forth' as  'frankly similar to what we have done in Iraq since the  mission changed there' and said it would 'also be  appropriate in Afghanistan'. Petraeus acknowledged, however, that 'we've got nearly four  years to go until that time. 'The determination to use the Senate testimony to ensure that  the policy was publicised appears to have been related to  the knowledge that Obama administration was finally moving  to get negotiations with the Taliban started — and that  making explicit the policy of maintaining military forces in  Afghanistan indefinitely would scuttle the chances for  starting such talks. The decision to launch an 'increased diplomatic effort' on  Afghanistan was also made in conjunction with the December  strategy review, according to Flournoy's Mar.  15 statement.   The first move by the administration was to make it clear  that what had appeared to be preconditions for negotiations  with the Taliban — an end to all ties with al Qaeda and  recognising the constitution of Afghanistan — were actually  going to be the outcomes of negotiations with the Taliban.  The diplomatic track was to be pursued through a regular  tripartite meeting with Afghanistan and Pakistan scheduled  for Feb.  23-24, according to knowledgeable sources.  It had  to be rescheduled after the Jan.  27 detention of CIA  consultant Raymond Davis by Pakistani authorities in Lahore  on murder charges.  Nevertheless, the clarification of administration  negotiating policy was included in a speech by Clinton at  the Asia Society Feb.  18.  And the tripartite meeting had  been rescheduled for Mar.  26.  The Pentagon apparently wanted the still covert policy of  long-term U. S.  combat presence in Afghanistan to be explicit  and on the record before the process of sounding out the  Taliban had gone too far. *Gareth Porter is an investigative historian and journalist  specialising in U. S.  national security policy.  The paperback  edition of his latest book, 'Perils of Dominance: Imbalance  of Power and the Road to War in Vietnam', was published in  2006. 