Phantasms from the 1990s are upon us: no-fly zones; the  rhetoric of humanitarian war in Washington, Europe and the  U. N. ; guarantees that no U. S.  ground troops will be deployed;  an air war which alone cannot decisively affect earthbound  events. President Barack Obama swung for ringing tones in his  statement on Libya, condemning idleness in the face of  merciless tyrants who brutally assault innocents. In the legal codes through which the international community  acknowledges so untoward a happening as war, the U. N.   resolved to protect civilians and create a cordon sanitaire  around the blighted country. But it was all a faraway echo from the Yugoslav heyday of  believing people could be bombed for humanitarian effect. The language of liberal war may still flow as easily in the  West as Libya's sweet crude, but even the true believers are  running on fumes on this one. Few critics have even bothered to point out the obvious  selectivity.  Obama meant no idling before this particular  tyrant, while the U. N.  Security Council offered the beatific  state of protected innocence to some Libyans only, not to  Syrians, Yemenis, Palestinians or Bahrainis, much less those  suffering in the Ivory Coast, Zimbabwe or elsewhere. Nonetheless the idea of liberal war, of the use of force for  humanitarian objectives, continues to cloud opinion and  profoundly informs the official terms of debate, in  international forums and especially in Western Europe.  It  also shapes the character of coalition operations over  Libya. Denying war, the art of euphemismsLiberal war is so useful, particularly to 'good Europeans',  because it denies it is war.  It is a no-fly zone protecting  human rights!While quite obviously joining the Libyan rebels in their war  on the regime, coalition commanders are forced to pretend  otherwise.  They regularly and politely inform Gaddafi's  forces where they need to regroup to avoid being destroyed  in the name of universal values. In essence, and without ever saying so, the message to  Gaddafi is that he must stop defending himself from those  who would overthrow him.  Why, we might ask, is it not  possible to speak more plainly, at least to ourselves? Why  must war be confronted with liberal euphemisms?At the core of liberal war is a contradiction between big  rhetoric — humanity, innocence, evil — and limited  liability, signalled by 'no ground troops' and the pathetic  legions of U. N.  peacekeepers. In wars primarily justified on altruistic grounds, the  elected leaders of the Western democracies wisely, if  conveniently, spare the blood if not the dollars of their  own citizens. The chosen weapon is air power and the cost is strategic  incoherence.  Absent a terrestrial policy, air forces are  left to blow things up, surveil the results, and fly about.   Other things being equal, the likely outcome is stalemate. Most pernicious is the way liberal war frames understanding  of conflicts.  It performs a sleight of hand that can only be  admired. A dramatic playThere is space for two main actors, the humane intervener  (typically the international community led by the West) and  the barbaric perpetrator (a changing and selective cast of  leaders, regimes and ethnic groups). As if by magic, real countries and peoples, with interwoven  histories, become characters in a morality play, essential  types who behave according to innate characteristics. The drama comes in various versions, and by no means does  the West always come out well in the end.  But the terms of  thought are set in riveting fashion: interest and ideals,  tragedy and politics, bureaucratic inaction and charisma. Historical memory is a casualty so instantaneous no one  notices.  The U. S.  fought its first war in what is now Libya,  against the Barbary pirates, also justified by humanitarian  concerns undergirded with commercial interest. Blinded by tales of well-intentioned Westerners and violent  natives again and again, it becomes impossible to see the  shared, interconnected histories that led to the current  conflict, and within which Libyans, Westerners and others  are situated. Libya was granted independence as a kingdom only 60 years  ago, with the U. S.  and UK as patrons, supplying cash and  arms in exchange for oil and stability. As elsewhere, then and now, this combination generated  popular resentment.  It provided the ground for political  alternatives, which Gaddafi seized. History's funhouseHe may be a character from history's funhouse, sent to  remind us that contingency's reign is great, but his origins  are to be found in the conjoined histories of the West and  the rest. More recently, Gaddafi's border police and coast guard,  trained and assisted by the EU, have been greatly valued by  the 'good Europeans' for helping keep out the Africans. Liberal war's last service is to locate the source of  violence in the natives, on the backward peoples of the non- European world, not on the Westerners who exploit, invade,  occupy and bomb. If we go by official rhetoric, the problem in Iraq and  Afghanistan apparently has to do with religious and ethnic  prejudice among the peoples there, who irrationally keep  killing one another as well as Western soldiers kindly sent  to modernise them. The great cost of liberal war is clarity.  The West now risks  creating a situation where it neither allows nor enables the  rebels to overthrow Gaddafi, nor will it do so itself. As in Bosnia and Kosovo, to supply arms or allow in Arab  volunteers, would violate the supposed neutrality of  humanitarian intervention.  Gaddafi can turn to death squads  and snipers to carry on his fight. War is not a morality tale, but a violent mutual embrace.   Serious thinking begins with acceptance that we in the West  are now combatants, and ethical responsibility requires  seeing beyond the seductions of liberalism. *Tarak Barkawi is Senior Lecturer, Centre of International  Studies, University of Cambridge.  He specialises in the  study of war, armed forces and society with a focus on  conflict between the West and the global South in historical  and contemporary perspective.  He is the author of  'Globalization and War', as well as many scholarly articles. Published under an agreement with Al-Jazeera. 