Widely praised as an effective defence of Washington's 10-day- old military intervention in Libya, President Barack Obama's  speech Monday evening appears to have left several key  questions about his future intentions unanswered. While confirming that the ouster of Libyan leader Moammar  Gaddafi remained a U. S.  policy goal, Obama ruled out the use  of military force to achieve it, noting that such a course  would 'splinter' the multilateral coalition that has thus  far backed the U. S. -led campaign.  Regime change, he  insisted, would be pursued only through 'non-military  means'. But with pro-Gaddafi forces reportedly mounting a counter- offensive against the rebels Tuesday, the question left  hanging was how Obama might yet bring about regime change or  whether he would be satisfied with something short of such  an outcome. Similarly, Obama's assertion that the U. S.  would, under  certain circumstances, intervene militarily - and even pre- emptively - for humanitarian purposes in countries where it  did not have vital interests raised questions about how  specific those circumstances have to be. Indeed, pundits across the political spectrum spent much of  Tuesday grappling with the question of whether the president  had enunciated an 'Obama Doctrine' that, while not nearly as  aggressive and unilateralist as that of his predecessor,  George W.  Bush, nonetheless prescribed a leading or an  'exceptional' role for the United States in protecting and  promoting its 'values' around the world. 'He thoroughly rejected the so-called realist approach,  extolled American exceptionalism, spoke of universal values  and insisted that American power should be used, when  appropriate, on behalf of those values,' exulted Robert  Kagan, a leading neo-conservative at the Brookings  Institution, who added that Obama had made clear that U. S.   leadership was 'essential, even indispensable'. But other analysts disagreed, arguing that the speech's bold  rhetoric - 'The United States is different.  And, as  president, I refused to wait for the images of slaughter and  mass graves before taking action' - was undercut by the  president's emphasis on the uniqueness of the situation. 'It's true that America cannot use our military wherever  repression occurs,' he said.  '…In this particular country -  Libya - at this particular moment, we were faced with the  prospect of violence on a horrific scale,' he said, speaking  of impending attack by Gaddafi's forces on the rebel  capital, Benghazi, last week.  'We had a unique ability to stop that violence: an  international mandate for action, a broad coalition prepared  to join us, the support of Arab countries, and a plea for  help from the Libyan people themselves,' he said. '[I]n effect, what he was saying was we will intervene to  advance our eternal American values …when circumstances  permit,' wrote David Rothkopf on his foreignpolicy. com blog.   'For all of the talk about our responsibilities to the  international community and to humanitarian ideals, the  message was: Libya, yes …Congo, no… Darfur, no.  …Syria,  probably not …Yemen, unlikely …Bahrain, heck no. ''I think the president was careful not to indicate that  Libya sets a precedent,' agreed Charles Kupchan, a foreign  policy specialist at the Council on Foreign Relations.  'I  think what he was trying to do was to build public support  for intervention in Libya, and historically speaking,  Americans respond well to arguments about the need for  humanitarian intervention. 'Obama's speech came amid growing public and Congressional  concerns about the U. S.  mission. Despite the clear success U. S.  and allied airpower had  achieved in preventing Gaddafi's forces from attacking  Benghazi and in turning the tide of battle in favour of the  rebels who, since late last week, had reclaimed much of the  territory along the eastern and central Mediterranean coasts  they had lost in the face of the government's counter- offensive earlier this month, polls conducted over the  weekend showed that the public was deeply and roughly evenly  split over Washington's intervention and Obama's handling of  the crisis. And while Obama's speech - and the fact that NATO will  formally take over command of the operation Wednesday - may  have bolstered confidence in his decision to intervene, the  fact that Gaddafi's forces reportedly regained ground  Tuesday could raise new questions. While the latest developments were themselves inconclusive,  they suggested that the most-optimistic scenarios here -  that the rebels would roll on to the gates of Tripoli as  demoralised pro-Gaddafi forces gave up resistance and  deserted en masse - were unlikely to be realised and that  the month-old civil war could slide into a strategic  stalemate. That in turn is likely to increase pressure on the  administration to take stronger action to achieve its  declared and repeated aim of removing Gaddafi, despite  Obama's insistence in his speech that he would use military  force only to protect civilians and not to effect regime  change.  Indeed, Republican Sen.  John McCain welcomed Obama's remarks  and particularly his 'clarity that the U. S.  goal is for  Gaddafi to leave power. ''But an equal amount of clarity is still required on how we  will accomplish that goal,' he went on, noting that 'the  potential for a long and bloody stalemate is still far too  high. 'Echoing recent appeals by neo-conservatives and liberal  interventionists, McCain called, in particular, for  'providing material support to opposition forces in Libya  while continuing to target Gaddafi's forces in the field,'  he said.  The latter recommendation appears already to have been  adopted despite Obama's assurances that he will pursue only  'non-military means' to remove the Libyan leader.  Quoting  military analysts, the New York Times reported Tuesday that  the U. S.  strategy 'is to hit Libyan forces hard enough to  force them to oust Colonel Qaddafi. ' 'In other words, no matter what Obama said last night, the  United States is in fact using military forces to produce  regime change in Libya,' wrote Stephen Walt, a Harvard  University international-relations expert on his  foreignpolicy. com blog Tuesday.  He also noted that the  speech left open the 'possibility of covert action by the  CIA, or even CIA-operated drone strikes'. As to arming the rebels, Secretary of State Hillary Clinton  opened the door to that option at a strategy meeting of  senior officials from several dozen leaders of European,  North American, and Arab countries and international  agencies in London Tuesday despite a U. N.  arms embargo on  Libya. 'It is our interpretation that (U. N.  Security Council  resolution) 1973 [which authorised military action to  protect civilians in Libya] amended or overrode the absolute  prohibition of arms to anyone in Libya so that there could  be legitimate transfer of arms if a country were to choose  to do that.  …[W]e have not made that decision at this time,'  she added. *Jim Lobe's blog on U. S.  foreign policy can be read at  http://www. lobelog. com. 