Forces loyal to Alassane Ouattara, the internationally  recognised winner of Cote d'Ivoire's presidential election,  say they have seized control of another two central towns in  their advance toward the country's capital. Captain Leon Alla, a defence spokesman for Ouattara, said  pro-Ouattara forces took control of Bouafle early on  Wednesday and Sinfra on Tuesday. Heavy gunfire was heard early on Wednesday in Bouafle, which  is midway between the cocoa-producing hub of Daloa and the  country's capital Yamoussoukro. Residents of Tiebisso, 40km north of the capital, also  reported fighting. 'Since about 6 o'clock this morning, we are hearing gunfire  in Bouafle,' Alain Zagole, a resident of the town, told the  Reuters news agency by phone. 'Machine gun fire and often heavy detonations.  It is as if  there are clashes,' he said. Military campaignThousands of people continue to flee the country due to the  heavy fighting following November's contested elections. In the past few days, forces loyal to Ouattara have stepped  up their military campaign - moving from their strongholds  in the north into the government-controlled south. Earlier this week, they reportedly seized the towns of  Daloa, Bondoukou and Belleville and were fighting for the  town of Duekoue. Marco Oved, a freelance journalist in Abijdan, said the  seizures represent rapid victories for pro-Ouattara forces  against fighters loyal to Laurent Gbagbo, the country's  incumbent leader who has refused to step down. 'They've moved hundreds of kilometres often from the west  into the centre of the country, and the east into the  centre,' he told Al Jazeera. Pro-Ouattara forcesThe pro-Ouattara forces, which Ouattara has recognised as  his military and renamed the Cote d'Ivoire Republican Forces  (FRCI), have controlled northern Cote d'Ivoire since the  civil war of 2002-3.     But Oved said it is unclear how much control is coming from  Ouattara himself. 'He distanced himself from these rebel forces for the last  eight years.  It was only after the election that the rebels  rallied to his side,' he told Al Jazeera. 'Ouattara accepted their support, but was hesitant to have  any fighting going on, saying as the legitimately elected  leader he didn't want to have to take the country by force.   The offensive over the last few days has shown that he feels  he has no other options now. ''Barbaric practices'The latest fighting comes a day after the U. N.  peacekeeping  mission in Cote d'Ivoire (UNOCI) released a statement saying  forces loyal to Gbagbo opened fire on civilians in Abidjan  on Monday, killing about a dozen people. 'With the increase in human rights violations and barbaric  practices, there are grounds for wondering whether president  Gbagbo is still in charge of his forces and supporters,'  Tuesday's statement said. 'UNOCI believes it is imperative to end this spiral of  violence by finding a definitive solution to the political  impasse which stemmed from the post-electoral crisis. 'Gbagbo's camp was not immediately available to comment on  the U. N.  statement. Up to one million Ivorians have now fled fighting in the  main city of Abidjan alone, according to the U. N.  refugee  agency.  Others have been uprooted across the country and at  least 112,000 have crossed into Liberia to the west. Tuesday's U. N.  report of more civilians killed adds to a  tally of 462 confirmed deaths since the crisis begin.  Human  rights groups say crimes against humanity may have already  been committed.      The world body is also investigating allegations that 200  African nationals, from Mali, Burkina Faso, Senegal, Guinea  and Togo, were killed near Guiglo, southwest of Duekoue. *Published under an agreement with Al-Jazeera. 