As forces loyal to Ivorian President-elect Alassane Ouattara  closed in on Abidjan Thursday, the administration of U. S.   President Barack Obama and U. N.  Secretary-General Ban Ki-Moon  called for the incumbent president, Laurent Gbabgo, to  immediately step down. Amid the most intense fighting since last November's  election, they also called on both sides to avoid civilian  casualties, which have mounted steadily over the past  several weeks as pro-Gbagbo militias, in particular, have  killed dozens of suspected Ouattara supporters at  checkpoints. 'The United States calls on all parties to exercise  restraint and to make the protection of civilians their  highest priority,' said Assistant Secretary of State for  African Affairs Johnnie Carson at a special press briefing  Thursday. 'The people of Cote d'Ivoire have already paid a very high  price for democracy.  We call upon both sides to ensure that  civilians do not pay an even higher price in the future,' he  said. That message was echoed by Ban's spokesman, Farhan Haq, who  called on the warring parties 'to exercise maximum  restraint, refrain from exacting revenge and place the  interests of the whole nation above all else. ' He also  called for Gbagbo 'to immediately cede power' to Ouattara,  the internationally recognised winner of the Nov.  27  presidential elections. Their remarks came as Ouattara's Republican Forces, which  have advanced with surprising speed through the western and  central parts of the country over the past week and on  Wednesday captured the country's administrative capital,  Yamoussoukro, reportedly reached Abidjan, Cote d'Ivoire's  largest city by far and Gbagbo's last major base of support. 'Abidjan is on the brink of a human rights catastrophe and  total chaos,' Salvatore Saguès, Amnesty International's  researcher on West Africa, warned Thursday. Various reports, however, suggested that the Republican  Forces may yet prevail relatively quickly. Noting, among other developments, that the chief of the army  staff, who had been loyal to Gbagbo, and his family had  sought asylum at the residence of the South African  ambassador's residence in Abidjan, Carson there was a 'clear  indication that the military forces of Gbagbo have, in fact,  started to disintegrate. ''I think it would be premature and probably a little bit  reckless for me to predict when Gbagbo will fall, whether it  will be in the next several hours, the next several days, or  the next several weeks.  But it is absolutely clear that he  is in a …significantly weakened position, having lost most  of the territory that he holds in the south and with  defections among his senior military ranks,' he said. Indeed, reports from Abidjan indicated that Gbagbo's forces  have abandoned a number of strategic positions, including  the Hotel du Golf, where Ouattara and his top aides have  been holed up since the election.  According to international  observers, he won by an eight-percent margin. Despite a gradual escalation of financial and diplomatic  sanctions imposed against him and his regime by the U. N.   Security Council, the Economic Community of West African  States (ECOWAS), and the African Union (AU) since the  election, however, Gbagbo has until now refused to cede  power. The four-month standoff has resulted in a steady rise in  ethnic tensions and violence.  The U. N.  estimates that some  500 people have been killed.  Human Rights Watch (HRW) reported Thursday that pro-Gbagbo  militias and Liberian mercenaries massacred at least 37 West  African immigrants in a village near the border with Liberia  Mar.  22, possibly in retaliation for the capture of nearby  areas by the Republican Forces. In a release, the group blamed Gbagbo's forces for most of  the violence against civilians suspected of supporting  Ouattara, although it also said pro-Ouattara forces have  also committed 'numerous' summary executions of presumed  pro-Gbagbo fighters and supporters, as well. The violence and instability have also displaced as many as  one million people, mostly from Abidjan, according to the  U. N.  High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), which noted  that more than 100,000 Ivoirians have sought refuge in  neighbouring countries, particularly Liberia. 'The reason why we are so concerned about the Ivory Coast  today is that if there is, in fact, a full-scale civil war  in that country, it will not only lead to large refugee  flows out into Liberia and to neighbouring states,' Carson  said Thursday.  'It will also probably lead to growing  instability in Sierra Leone, Liberia and other countries  that have been plagued by instability before. 'In the latest turn of the screw, the U. N.  Security Council  Wednesday approved a new resolution calling for Gbagbo to  leave office and for the 11,000-strong U. N.  peacekeeping  mission in Cote d'Ivoire (UNOCI) to use all necessary means  to protect civilians and seize heavy weapons.  HRW and other  rights groups have called for UNOCI to be reinforced with  additional equipment, helicopters, and troops.  The resolution also mandated additional sanctions against  Gbagbo, his wife and three other close associates and called  on all parties to cooperate with a U. N.  Human Rights Council  investigation of abuses.  The conclusions of such an  investigation could be referred to the prosecutor's office  of the International Criminal Court (ICC), which since  November has repeatedly indicated interest in pursuing its  own investigation, according to HRW. Carson hinted that Washington would use the threat of an ICC  prosecution as leverage to persuade Gbagbo to give up and  order his loyalists, particularly his youth militia, the  Jeunes Patriotes, to lay down their arms. 'If, in fact, there is major violence in Abidjan, and Gbagbo  does not step aside, he and those around him, including his  wife, Simone Gbagbo, will have to be held accountable for  the actions that they failed to take to stop it,' he said.  Asked whether he will be held accountable for past abuses,  Carson responded affirmatively, adding, however, 'But he  does have an opportunity, but that opportunity is slipping  away. 'Carson also denied that the situation in Cote d'Ivoire was  comparable to that in Libya, where the U. S.  and its allies  have intervened militarily to prevent government forces from  killing civilians. He noted that the international community has intervened in  Cote d'Ivoire with UNOCI supplemented by French military  units and that, unlike Libyan leader Moammar Gaddafi, 'the  former government of Laurent Gbagbo does not have helicopter  gunships, jet aviation, or tanks in the numbers that we have  seen in (Libya), nor have we seen the tremendous loss of  life or the exceeding large number of people racing for the  borders. '*Jim Lobe's blog on U. S.  foreign policy can be read at  http://www. lobelog. com. 