The United Nations has remained virtually helpless as hundreds  of its staffers, mostly peacekeepers, are killed, kidnapped or  victimised by unbridled violence worldwide. The latest victims - three staff members and four Nepalese  guards - were killed Friday when protesters stormed the U. N  compound in the city of Mazar-i-Sharif in Afghanistan. 'They were killed when they were running out of the bunker,'  said Staffan de Mistura, the U. N.  special envoy in  Afghanistan. 'I am profoundly sad and I am also shocked by what I saw,  but we continue our work,' he told reporters in Kabul.  'We  are not going to be deterred. ' The attack was triggered by the burning of the Quran,  Islam's holiest book, by U. S.  pastor Terry Jones last week -  even though the United Nations had strongly condemned the  act. Last year, one staff member, 10 peacekeepers and three  civilian subcontractors lost their lives as a result of  violence. But the biggest single loss of lives in 2010 was attributed  to the January earthquake in Haiti, which killed 59 civilian  personnel and 43 members of the police and military  contingents of the U. N.  Stabilisation Mission in the  Caribbean nation.   The killings in Afghanistan last week have once again  underlined the lack of protection and security for U. N.   personnel in conflict zones. But according to Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, the vast  majority of U. N.  member states - 169 out of 192 - are yet to  ratify or accede to a protocol extending legal protection  for U. N.  staff worldwide. The Optional Protocol to the 1994 Convention on the Safety  of U. N.  and Associated Personnel entered into force last  year but it does not have legal status in member countries  until ratified by their respective parliaments or  governments. Still, there are several countries, including Britain,  Ireland, Australia and Singapore, which have adopted or  strengthened domestic legislation to protect U. N.  staffers. Last week, Stephen Kisambira, president of the U. N.  Staff  Union, singled out Singapore for special praise for having  recently passed the U. N.  Personnel Act, a wide-ranging piece  of domestic legislation which criminalises attacks against  U. N.  staff, premises and vehicles. Singapore's Senior Minister of State for Foreign Affairs  Zainul Abidin Rasheed told Parliament last month that  although Singapore does not host any U. N.  operations, it is  the country's duty 'as a responsible member of the  international community to put in place measures to protect  those who carry out the important work undertaken by the  United Nations in its various missions around the world'. The legislation also ensures that perpetrators of crimes  against the United Nations and its associated personnel will  not find a safe haven in Singapore, he said. Ambassador Vanu Gopala Menon of Singapore told IPS the U. N.   Personnel Act essentially gives domestic effect to the 1994  Convention on the Safety of United Nations and Associated  Personnel, which Singapore is party to, and the 2005  Optional Protocol to the Convention, which Singapore is  planning soon to accede to. He said it seeks to ensure that the Singapore government is  able to punish any individual, including Singaporeans, who  commits specified crimes against U. N.  workers (or their  official premises, place of residence, or vehicle) outside  Singapore, which if committed in Singapore, would constitute  offences in the First and Second Schedules of the Singapore  Penal Code. These include murder, grievous hurt, kidnapping, causing an  explosion, causing mischief etc. The Act additionally empowers the Singaporean government to  punish threats, attempts, abetment, conspiracy or the  withholding of information on such attacks on U. N.  workers,  he added. 'The Act also obligates Singapore to either extradite or  prosecute any alleged offender found in our territory, as  well as to provide mutual legal assistance to States Parties  with regard to the offences,' said Menon. According to the Staff Union, at least 28 U. N.  civilian  staff were detained or arrested worldwide last year,  primarily in job-related incidents, while another 12 U. N.   police and civilians were abducted, including one civilian  staff member who was held captive in Darfur for nearly three  months. Kisambira said the Darfur region of the Sudan, the  Democratic Republic of the Congo and Afghanistan continue to  be among 'the most dangerous areas for United Nations  personnel'. 'We appeal to the governments concerned to do the utmost to  guarantee the protection of United Nations staff and other  related personnel.  The string of kidnappings in Darfur is  particularly worrisome,' he added.  In 2009, 31 United Nations civilian personnel lost their  lives as a result of acts of violence, according to a recent  report of the Secretary-General. The deaths were related to terrorism (16), crime (six) and  armed conflict (nine). In the same year, 110 were injured as a result of acts of  violence, 22 were abducted and 163 arrested and detained.  