As Cote d'Ivoire enters its fourth month of post-election  violence with intensified fighting and bloodshed, the White  House is defending its efforts thus far to shepherd a solution  to the stalemate between incumbent Laurent Gbagbo and Alassane  Ouattara, the internationally-recognised winner of last fall's  elections. 'For the past four months, the United States has been  working closely with its African and other international  partners to achieve a peaceful outcome to the Ivorian  crisis,' contended U. S.  assistant secretary for African  Affairs Johnnie Carson at the Woodrow Wilson International  Centre for Scholars here on Tuesday. While the Barack Obama administration's attention has been  gripped by turbulence in other parts of the world, rights  groups and regional observers have been raising the alarm  about Cote d'Ivoire for months, warning of a relapse into  the civil war that ravaged the country for decades and a  building humanitarian crisis.  More than 100,000 refugees  have streamed to next-door Liberia, Oxfam estimates, while  according to the United Nations, over one million residents  have been displaced from their homes. News of massacres and mass graves, the targeting of U. N.   personnel on the ground, and accusations of violence by both  sides have been consistent since at least January, with the  latest mass atrocity of more than 800 gruesome civilian  deaths by small arms and machete in the town of Duekoue  reported by the International Red Cross over the weekend,  apparently as a result of inter-ethnic fighting. 'Tragically, the violence that we are seeing could have been  averted had Laurent Gbagbo respected the results of last  year's presidential election,' Obama said in a statement on  Tuesday, in which he once again called for the embattled  incumbent to cede power to Ouattara and urged all parties to  cease bloodshed. 'When the crisis in the Ivory Coast started to unfold…the  entire upper level of the administration was engaged,'  Carson noted.  'President Obama called President Gbagbo not  once, but twice. ' The phone calls, he said, were followed by  a letter to Gbagbo, which offered him refuge in the United  States and a fellowship at a prestigious university in  exchange for his resignation. 'We did in fact take a pro-active and engaged policy,'  Carson continued.  'All of these overtures — all of these  overtures — have been rejected. 'Given Gbagbo's obstinate defiance of the election results —  he garnered 46 percent of the vote, while 54 percent went to  his opponent — Ouattara, whose own forces are accused by  rights groups and refugees of civilian killings and reprisal  attacks, was calling for his removal by military might as  early as the New Year, warning of continued carnage should  the stalemate of power persist. Two regime-changes and a no-fly zone in North Africa later,  critics are wondering whether the deaths of hundreds,  perhaps thousands, and the displacement of over a million  civilians in Cote d'Ivoire could have been avoided with more  urgent international attention and stronger force behind the  widespread calls for Gbagbo to step down and violence to  end. Why Libya and not Cote d'Ivoire?'The situation in the Ivory Coast is frequently compared to  that of Libya in terms of the international community's  response and responsibilities to protect innocent civilians.   That notion is simply wrong,' Carson argued. The comparisons to the situation in the Maghreb are obvious:  A strongman clings stubbornly to power and the opposition  takes up arms as civilians are massacred and flee the  country en masse, while the stability of the region is  threatened with the precedent-setting potential of a  bulldozed attempt at something that might resemble a  democracy. With some 20 countries in Africa slated to hold elections  this year — including in neighbouring Liberia, the lion's  share recipient of Ivorian refugees — observers saw Cote  d'Ivoire as a test of the continent's commitment to  democratise.  If the results of an internationally-deemed  legitimate election were flouted and yet another strongman  was allowed to remain in power, the effect would be  demoralising to would-be African democrats, the thinking  went.  'This was a test case, not only for the Ivory Coast, this  was a test case also for Africa,' Carson said.  'The ballot  must be respected. 'Similarly, it was feared that Muammar Gaddafi's crackdown on  civilians would threaten the Arab Spring of popular  uprisings sweeping the Middle East and wilt the fragile  bloom of its post-revolution Egyptian and Tunisian  neighbours — a rationale that helped buoy the arguments for  military intervention in Libya. 'The democratic impulses that are dawning across the region  would be eclipsed by the darkest form of dictatorship, as  repressive leaders concluded that violence is the best  strategy to cling to power,' Obama said in his speech  defending U. S.  military action in Libya. But beneath the quick comparisons are important differences,  analysts contend.  Some 11,000 U. N.  blue helmets are on the  ground in Cote d'Ivoire, supplemented by French forces,  while Gbagbo lacks the airborne military force that Gaddafi  deployed against his people. 'Without the presence of these peacekeepers, there is  absolutely no doubt that the situation in Cote d'Ivoire  would be far worse than it is now,' Carson argued.  'Overall,  the international community's responses in Cote d'Ivoire  thus far have been appropriately matched to the political  and military circumstances on the ground. 'In response to escalating violence and a reported uptick in  U. N. -targeted attacks, four U. N.  helicopters fired missiles  at two military camps and the presidential palace in the  capital of Abidjan, where Gbagbo is housed and  headquartered, on Monday — a rare and extraordinary move for  the world body with its sparse history of military action. 'The ballot must be respected…and the international  community will act if the situation warrants,' Carson  reiterated, issuing a warning to other would-be incumbent  strongmen bent on clinging to power through violent means. But Carson also issued a caveat: 'We should nonetheless be  humbled about what can be expected of external intervention  in general. '*Follow Aprille Muscara on Twitter at @aprilledaughn. 