In the course of 24 hours earlier this week, Turkish Foreign  Minister Ahmet Davuto&#287;lu met a top envoy from Libya,  dispatched a senior Turkish official to Tripoli and traveled  to Bahrain and Syria, all struggling to survive the pro- democracy Arab spring. It was a typical performance for Turkey's top diplomat.  From  Libya to Iran, from Gaza to Afghanistan, Turkey has thrust  itself into crises that have frustrated more powerful  nations.  So far, however, Ankara's most concrete diplomatic  achievement has been to free four New York Times journalists  from the custody of Libyan leader Muammar Gaddafi last  month. A foreign policy on steroids is a hallmark of the Justice  and Development (AK) party that has governed Turkey since  2002.  But the party's Islamic roots may have less to do with  the new orientation than nationalism and economic self- interest. What Turkish officials have dubbed 'neo-Ottomanism' is  closer to 'neo-Gaullism', says Omer Taspinar, director of  the Turkey programme at the Brookings Institution in  Washington.  Turkey's role reflects not so much the country's  desire to improve relations with Muslim neighbours as it  does 'Turkish national pride and a sense of grandeur,'  Taspinar said.  'There is a new self-confidence bordering on  hubris. 'Several factors have contributed to this self-confidence.   Turkey, which refused to allow U. S.  ground troops to invade  Iraq from Turkish soil, benefited from the perception that  it had chosen wisely, yet has managed to restore close ties  with Baghdad and even with the autonomous government in  Iraqi Kurdistan. French and German opposition to rapid Turkish accession to  the European Union pushed Turkey toward the Middle East,  Russia and Asia - a shift that seems prescient now given  Europe's economic problems and Turkey's nine-percent annual  growth.  Turkish per capita GDP has quintupled to about  10,000 dollars since the AKP came to power, meeting the  party's chief domestic goal. Sclerotic Arab regimes, combined with U. S.  setbacks, left a  diplomatic vacuum in the Middle East.  Turkey's harsh  condemnation of Israel's massive offensive against Gaza two  years ago burnished Ankara's credentials among Arabs. However, it infuriated Israel and undermined Turkey's  potential as a mediator between Israel and the Arabs.   Relations with Israel deteriorated to nearly a breaking  point last summer after Israel attacked a Turkish-registered  ship attempting to break the blockade of Gaza, killing nine  activists including a dual Turkish-American citizen. Turkish officials say they came close to brokering an  Israeli-Syrian deal in 2008 and might have succeeded if not  for Israel's offensive in Gaza. The Turks also bristle at criticism of their efforts last  year to broker a confidence-building deal with Iran that  would have traded 1,200 kilogrammes of Iranian low-enriched  uranium for fuel for a Tehran research reactor that makes  medical isotopes.  By the time Tehran agreed to what had  initially been a U. S.  proposal, it had amassed a larger  stockpile of LEU and the U. N.  Security Council was about to  pass a new sanctions resolution. The U. S.  and its diplomatic partners, while rejecting the  'Tehran declaration' mediated by Turkey and Brazil, agreed  to talks with Iran in Istanbul earlier this year but no  progress was made. The latest challenge to Turkish diplomacy — the pro- democracy wave in the Arab world — has spurred more activity  but also led to a certain amount of hedging.  Turkish Prime  Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan was among the first foreign  leaders to call for Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak to step  down.  But Turkey has waffled on Libya — where Turkey has  billions in construction contracts - and called for a  ceasefire that could leave Gaddafi in place.  Turkey is also  ambivalent about Syria, a crucial ally in curbing a nagging  Kurdish rebellion. The Turkish performance is undermining Arab goodwill. An op-ed by Gamal Sultan in the Egyptian newspaper Al- Mesryoon on Tuesday called Turkey 'shameful and  opportunistic' for refusing to condemn Gaddafi's 'massacres  against his people' and hesitating about supporting a no-fly  zone against Gaddafi's forces. 'Erdogan gained a lot on the political and human levels in  the Arab world, when he adopted a courageous position toward  the Israeli blockade imposed on the Gaza Strip,' Sultan  wrote.  'Now however, Erdogan is losing this credit due to  his position in favor of Gaddafi and his gangster sons… Is  the Libyan blood in Misrata not as precious as the  Palestinian blood in Gaza?Turkey has proven to be a valuable U. S.  ally in Afghanistan,  where its 1,700 troops act as peacekeepers in Kabul and  Turkish provincial reconstruction teams have built 80  schools and nearly 50 hospitals.  Unlike other NATO members,  Turkey has vowed to keep a presence in Afghanistan for the  long term. Turkey is also taking a prominent role in efforts to create  an international context for a peace agreement in  Afghanistan.  A meeting in Istanbul last June produced a  preliminary declaration.  The top U. N.  envoy in Kabul,  Staffan de Mistura, would like to build on this at another  conference in Turkey later this year of Afghan neighbours  and other key players. Asked why Ankara has taken on so many difficult diplomatic  tasks with so little assurance of success, a Turkish  official, who spoke on condition of anonymity, told IPS this  week, 'You get burned when you are touching hot objects but  someone has to do it. '