President Barack Obama has given his approval to a Pentagon  plan to station U. S.  combat troops in Iraq beyond 2011,  provided that Iraqi Premier Nouri al-Maliki officially  requests it, according to U. S.  and Iraqi sources. But both U. S.  and Iraqi officials acknowledge that Maliki  may now be reluctant to make the official request.  Maliki  faces severe political constraints at home, and his  government is being forced by recent moves by Saudi Arabia  to move even closer to Iran. And it is no longer taken for granted by U. S.  or Iraqi  officials that Maliki can survive the rising tide of  opposition through the summer. As early as September 2010, the White House informed the  Iraqi government that it was willing to consider keeping  between 15,000 and 20,000 troops in Iraq, in addition to  thousands of unacknowledged Special Operations Forces.  But  Obama insisted that it could only happen if Maliki requested  it, according to a senior Iraqi intelligence official. And the White House, which was worried about losing support  from the Democratic Party's anti-war base as Congressional  mid-term elections approached, insisted that the  acknowledged troops would have to be put at least ostensibly  under a State Department-run security force.  Several days after Egyptian strongman Hosni Mubarak, the key  U. S.  strategic ally in the Middle East for 30 years, was  forced by the pro-democracy movement to resign in early  February, Iraqi officials were informed that Obama was now  more convinced than before that he could not afford to be  tagged with having 'lost' Iraq, the intelligence official  told IPS.  Proponents of a post-2011 U. S.  presence in Iraq within the  Obama administration had taken advantage of the generally  accepted view that the Iraq War was turned around from a  dismal failure into a success in 2007-08 by the troop surge  and the strategy of Gen.  David Petraeus.  The Defence Department officials had indicated to the Iraqis  in February that Obama was now prepared to support the  stationing of 17,000 U. S.  combat troops beyond 2011,  contingent on Maliki's sending an official letter of request  to Obama, according to the Iraqi intelligence official.  The Pentagon also began making contingency plans for the  stationing of the 3rd Infantry Division in the tense city of  Kirkuk, according to the official. But since those signs of greater determination by Obama to  leave a semi-permanent military presence in Iraq, the  likelihood of Maliki's making the official request for the  troops has come increasingly into question.  Both U. S.  and Iraqi officials now acknowledge that Maliki's  need for Moqtada al-Sadr's political support and the degree  to which Sadr has regained influence in the Shi'a south  after having lost it in mid-2008 represent serious political  constraints on his position regarding a possible  continuation of the U. S.  troop presence.  Sadr's calling on his followers to stay away from a mass  demonstration against Maliki's government Feb.  25 may have  saved Maliki's government from collapsing, the Iraqi  intelligence official told IPS.  And Sadr continues to oppose a U. S.  military presence in  Iraq.  After returning to Iraq in January, Sadr had issued a  fiery message reaffirming that the 'first objective should  be to get rid of the occupation'. 'If al-Maliki were to ask for U. S.  troops, the Sadrists  would try to unseat him,' said the Iraqi intelligence  official, who added that Maliki's survival through the  summer is no longer taken for granted.  An official U. S.  source also suggested that Maliki's  government could collapse before a decision is made on a  request for a continuing U. S.  troop presence. But the Saudi dispatch of combat troops to Bahrain last  month to repress the pro-democracy movement that represented  the Shi'a majority in that country may have made a move  toward the United States difficult, if not impossible for  Maliki.  That aggressive Saudi action against the Shi’a of Bahrain  has made it clearer that Saudi Arabia must be regarded as  Iraq's primary enemy, according to the Iraqi intelligence  official.    But it is only part of a larger problem of Iraqi conflict  with Saudi Arabia.   Iraqi intelligence has indications that  the original al Qaeda in Iraq network is in the process of  leaving the country for Libya, but that another organisation  now operating under the name of al Qaeda in Iraq is actually  a Saudi-supported Baathist paramilitary group run from  Jordan by a former high-ranking general under Saddam  Hussein.  The need to defend against Saudi infiltration of Iraq and be  fully committed on one side of the Sunni-Shi'a divide in the  region means that Maliki has had to move even closer to  Iran.  Political unrest in Iraq in the form of popular protests,  mainly over the failure of his government to improve basic  services to the population, has also forced Maliki to reduce  the priority his government had previously put on military  cooperation with the U. S.  One indicator of Maliki's intentions is his apparent  hesitation about proceeding with the purchase of 18 of the  latest model U. S.  F-16 fighter planes.  Complete with  advanced air-to-ground and air-to-air munitions, the deal  was estimated to be worth 4. 2 billion dollars. When the deal was officially announced last September, the  Defense Security Cooperation Agency, the Pentagon's office  for foreign arms sales, had crowed that it would 'ensure a  U. S.  military presence in Iraq for years to come'. In late January, the U. S.  command in Iraq was so convinced  that Maliki was about to sign the agreement that it  mistakenly put out a press release announcing that the  signing had already taken place. But after protests began in Baghdad and Karbala in February,  Iraqi government spokesman Ali Dabbagh said the F-16  contract had been 'postponed this year'.  He explained that  the 900 million dollars required as a down payment on the F- 16 deal would be spent on increasing the total amount spent  on food rations for needy people from three billion to four  billion dollars. Even though the Iraqi government announced Mar.  1 that  higher oil prices would add eight billion dollars to Iraq's  budget this year, the F-16 fighter deal has nevertheless  been downgraded to 12 planes, with less sophisticated  weapons systems.  The deal is now estimated to be worth just  over one-fourth of the original, with a down payment that  has shrunk to 250 million dollars.  But it is still far from certain that Maliki will sign the  deal, according to the Iraqi military source, because Maliki  has decided on the building of a multi-billion-dollar  national electric power grid. If the Iraqi premier does not ask for U. S.  troops to remain  after the expiration of the November 2008 U. S. -Iraq  withdrawal agreement, it will be a major blow to the  assertion made over the past three years portraying Maliki  as an ally of the United States who wants U. S.  help in  keeping Iraq out of the Iranian sphere of influence. The reality is much less favourable to the rosy view of U. S.   influence in Iraq.  Press accounts have revealed that key  events in that period - including the selection of Maliki as  prime minister in 2006, the 2007 ceasefires in Basrah and  Baghdad, and the renewed political alliance between Maliki  and Sadr in 2010 - were all brokered by Gen.  Qassem  Suleimani, commander of the Quds Force of Iran's Islamic  Revolutionary Guard Corps. Close security and political relations between Maliki's  government and Iran are based not only on a shared past of  Shi'a activism but continuing conflict between Shi'a states  and a Saudi-led anti-Shi'a coalition. *Gareth Porter is an investigative historian and journalist  specialising in U. S.  national security policy.  The paperback  edition of his latest book, 'Perils of Dominance: Imbalance  of Power and the Road to War in Vietnam', was published in  2006. 