In something of a replay of the infighting among Republicans  over Washington's military interventions in the Balkans in the  1990s, U. S.  involvement in the civil war in Libya is exposing  serious splits among self-described conservatives. On the one hand, Republican 'realists' in the tradition of  President George H. W.  Bush - of whom Pentagon chief Robert  Gates was a protégé - are clearly worried that Washington is  'overextending' itself by intervening in a country that is  not 'vital' to U. S.  national-security or economic interests.  They are backed by many members of the increasingly  influential Tea Party, which is determined to slash the  mushrooming federal deficit.  They worry that another open- ended military commitment in Libya, particularly if it is  protracted, could make their mission much harder. Arrayed against them are the neo-conservatives and their  allies in Congress, notably Sen.  John McCain, the 2008  Republican presidential candidate.  The latter have called for President Barack Obama to take  all necessary measures, including arming and training rebels  and expanding the list of targets subject to U. S.  and NATO  bombing, to oust Libyan leader Moammar Gaddafi. As with the Balkan wars of the 1990s, they are forging  alliances with liberal interventionists in the Democratic  Party and, to the extent they can, inside the administration  to get their way. Whether they will succeed as they did with another  Democratic president, Bill Clinton, in Bosnia from 1993 to  1995 and then again in Kosovo in 1999, remains to be seen.  Obama himself has made clear that, while he shares their  goal of regime change in Libya, he is very reluctant to  involve the U. S.  military more deeply in the unfolding  conflict.  In this, Obama enjoys strong backing from the Pentagon, and  particularly from Gates, who, in Congressional testimony  that drew harsh complaints from neo-conservatives last week,  rejected a U. S.  role in arming and training the rebels,  insisting that other countries could undertake such an  effort, if they so desired. Gates' clear lack of enthusiasm for deepening Washington's  military commitment in yet another uncertain conflict with  no clear 'exit strategy' recalls the exasperation felt by  then-chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Gen.  Colin Powell  in 1993, when he was asked by then-UN Amb.  (and consummate  liberal hawk) Madeleine Albright, 'What's the point of  having this superb military you're always talking about if  we can't use it?' 'I thought I would have an aneurysm,' Powell — who, like  Gates, was a Bush I protégé - later wrote about his reaction  to Albright's question, which he thought betrayed an all too  cavalier attitude toward using U. S.  military force. At the time, Albright, strongly supported by most neo- conservatives, was lobbying Clinton to intervene in Bosnia,  something Bush had refused to do - just as he had rejected  their appeals to send U. S.  troops to Baghdad at the end of  the 1991 Gulf War. By the time the Dayton Accords that ended the war in Bosnia  were signed in November 1995, neo-conservatives had become  increasingly dismayed with what they saw as growing  'isolationism' among Republican lawmakers who won a majority  in Congress the previous year. In 1996, two prominent neo-conservatives, William Kristol  and Robert Kagan, published an article titled 'Toward a Neo- Reaganite Foreign Policy,' in 'Foreign Affairs' in which  they criticised a 'confused American conservatism' and  called for fellow Republicans to embrace a policy of  'military supremacy and moral confidence' whose main aim  would be to preserve Washington's 'benevolent global  hegemony …as far into the future as possible. 'In 1997, Kristol and Kagan co-founded the Project for the  New American Century (PNAC) whose charter — a distillation  of the ideas contained in their 'Foreign Affairs' article -  was signed by other prominent neo-conservatives, such as  Paul Wolfowitz and Elliott Abrams, as well as aggressive  nationalists, including Dick Cheney and Donald Rumsfeld, who  would claim top positions in the George W.  Bush  administration six years later. But it wasn't until the 9/11 attacks and the subsequent  invasion of Iraq that PNAC's views came to dominate the  Republican foreign-policy thinking.  Many leading Republicans were sceptical of — or outright  opposed to — the 1999 Kosovo war, which once more found neo- conservatives allied with liberal interventionists in urging  its prosecution. 'Before we go bombing sovereign nations, we ought to have a  plan,' warned Texas Republican Sen.  Kay Bailey Hutchison at  the time in an eerie echo of the current debate over Libya.   Republican leaders in the House of Representatives,  meanwhile, insisted on calling the Kosovo air campaign 'the  Democratic war' or 'Clinton's war' to underline their  disapproval. And when McCain proposed a resolution authorising the use of  'all necessary force' in Kosovo, including the introduction  of U. S.  ground troops, most Republicans lined up against  him. Indeed, in the 2002 presidential campaign, candidate George  W.  Bush, who defeated McCain in the Republican primaries  that year, suggested that his foreign-policy views were  considerably more 'humble' than those of either the neo- conservatives or the liberal interventionists.  His  subsequent appointment of Powell as secretary of state  encouraged many observers — and voters — in the belief that  he would follow in his father's footsteps. But the 9/11 attacks tilted the balance of power — both  within the Bush administration and the Republican majority  in Congress — decisively in PNAC's direction, as Cheney,  Rumsfeld, and Wolfowitz, among other hawks, seized control  of the policy and led the country to invade Iraq in 2003.  Even as Bush himself began to moderate his policies in his  second term, and particularly after the Democrats swept the  2006 mid-term Congressional elections and the president  replaced Rumsfeld with Gates, Republicans in Congress  remained firmly wedded to the PNAC vision.  Two years later, McCain, most of whose closest foreign- policy advisers were neo-conservatives, emerged with the  party's presidential nomination from a Republican field in  which all but one of the major candidates were at least as —  of not more hawkish — than he. But, even before Libya, a combination of the September 2008  financial crisis and growing war fatigue on the part of the  public — not to mention McCain's electoral defeat by Obama —  appeared to be slowly turning the clock backwards by  rekindling the intra-party foreign-policy conflicts of the  1990's.   The Tea Party's emergence as a major force has already  resulted in the Republican leadership's willingness to  consider cutting the defence budget - a notion that has long  been anathema to neo-conservatives, whose PNAC has since  morphed into a new organisation, the Foreign Policy  Initiative, that has sought common cause with liberal  interventionists.  The debate over U. S.  military intervention in Libya  threatens to accelerate the time-travelling process, as  McCain's appeals for Washington to take 'all necessary  measures' to oust Gaddafi — reminiscent of his efforts  around the Kosovo war - aren't resonating with his fellow- Republicans in the way they would have two or three years  ago. The fact that Gates, in particular, has made his opposition  to a stronger commitment as clear as he has - and that the  military brass appears to be backing him up — appears also  to have made some in the party's leadership think twice  about the political wisdom of indulging the hawks. *Jim Lobe's blog on U. S.  foreign policy can be read at  http://www. lobelog. com. 