Contrary to claims by Chiquita Brands International that its  payments to Colombian paramilitary and guerrilla groups over  more than a decade were extorted, internal company documents  released here Thursday strongly suggest that the transactions  provided specific benefits to the banana giant. The documents, which were published by the National Security  Archive (NSA), an independent research group, raised  questions about the factual basis for a 2007 plea agreement  between Chiquita and the U. S.  Department of Justice (DOJ)  under which the company was fined 25 million dollars for  paying the United Self-Defence Forces of Colombia (AUC),  which was designated a terrorist group by the State  Department in 2001. Under the agreement, which capped a four-year investigation,  government attorneys accepted the company's contention that  the payments to the AUC, which began in 1997, amounted to  'protection' money and that Chiquita never received any  actual services in exchange for them. But some of the documents released by the NSA appeared to  contradict that contention.  They detail Chiquita's handling  of what the company referred to as 'sensitive payments' from  1990, when it was paying left-wing guerrilla groups active  in Uraba, to 2003 when a PowerPoint presentation obtained by  the NSA presents options for how to conceal improper  payments. A March 2000 memo, for example, recorded a conversation  between Chiquita Senior Counsel Robert Thomas, the memo's  author, and managers from the company's wholly-owned  subsidiary, Banadex, in which the latter indicate that Santa  Marta-based paramilitaries formed a front company to  disguise 'the real purpose of providing security' to  Banadex's local operations.  Thomas quotes one participant, whose name is deleted from  the document, as saying 'we should continue making the  payments; we can't get the same level of support from the  military. ''Chiquita's apparent quid pro quo with guerrillas and  paramilitaries responsible for countless killings belies the  company's 2007 plea deal with the Justice Department,'  Michael Evans, NSA's chief researcher on Colombia, told IPS.   'What we still don't know is why U. S.  prosecutors overlooked  what appears to be clear evidence that Chiquita benefited  from these transactions. 'The Justice Department did not return calls about the case.   Ed Loyd, a company spokesman, insisted that 'Chiquita made  payments solely out of a well-grounded fear of retaliation  against its employees if the company refused' and defended  the plea agreement. 'The Department of Justice, which …is charged with  objectively analysing the facts, reviewed ALL of these  documents as part of an exhaustive investigation that lasted  nearly four years,' he wrote in an email to IPS.  '[It] found  NO evidence that Chiquita shared any of the murderous goals  of the terrorist groups it was forced to pay. 'The document dump took place on the same day as a meeting  between Colombian President Juan Manuel Santos and U. S.   President Barack Obama to finalise a so-called 'Action Plan  on Labour Rights' — a deal meant to secure Congressional  approval of the countries' long pending Free Trade Agreement  (FTA). The FTA, negotiated under the last George W.  Bush  administration, has been stalled precisely over charges by  the pact's critics that Bogota has not done enough to  dismantle paramilitary groups responsible for killing  thousands of labour activists over the past two decades.   Nearly 150 unionists have been murdered in the past three  years alone, according to Colombia's main labour rights  group Escuela Nacional Sindical (ENS). 'I think it's important for people to bear in mind that  there's a serious cost to doing business in Colombia that  goes beyond simple extortion payments, or whatever you want  to call them, and can be counted by the number of people  killed by these illegal armed groups,' Evans said. The AUC are supposed to have been disbanded from 2003-2006,  but successor groups and criminal bands, or 'bacrim',  continue to dominate large swathes of the country. 'It is of great concern that the U. S.  is moving forward with  an FTA with Colombia without addressing the full  dismantlement of Colombian paramilitary groups,' Gimena  Sanchez, an Andean expert at the Washington Office on Latin  America, told IPS.  'As such, we worry about the proliferation of more Chiquita- like cases,' she continued.  'Currently in the Choco region,  23 oil palm industrialists are under indictment for links to  paramilitarism and violent displacement. 'Also concerning to critics of the Washington-Bogota trade  pact is a history of complicity by Colombian police,  military, judicial, and political officials with these  illegal armed groups.  Indeed, the NSA documents suggest that  state security forces encouraged and facilitated Chiquita's  payments to the AUC, and were even recipients of such funds. While most payments in the early 1990's were paid to  guerrilla groups, an August 1993 memo indicates that the  company subsidiary in Turbo had begun channelling security  payments to the Colombian Army through a 'banana  association' known as 'Agura' at a price of three cents per  box of bananas shipped.  By 1998, the documents suggest that the company had begun  paying the AUC through legal Convivir militias that then- governor of Antoquia Department — and future president —  Alvaro Uribe was actively promoting.  One 1997 memo also  notes that Convivir militias 'operate under military  supervision (and have offices at the military bases)' and  that 'their sole function is to provide information on  guerrilla movements. 'Another 2000 memo by Thomas described a 1997 meeting in  which the AUC's notorious leader, Carlos Castano first  suggested to Banadex managers that they support a new  Convivir, called La Tagua del Darien. According to the memo, the Banadex officials said they had  'no choice but to attend the meeting,' because 'refusing to  meet would antaogonise the Colombia military, local and  state government officials, and Autodefensas. 'The newly released documents consist of more than 5,500  pages of internal Chiquita memos obtained by the NSA from  the Justice Department under the Freedom of Information Act. They are also likely to be used by plaintiffs in an ongoing  civil lawsuit here against Chiquita on behalf of dozens of  Colombians killed by right-wing paramilitaries, notably the  AUC. In addition to fuelling the FTA debate, the newly disclosed  documents are also likely to bolster half a dozen federal  lawsuits against Chiquita on behalf of the families of  hundreds of AUC victims in the banana-growing region of  Uraba where Chiquita and its affiliates are active. 'They reinforce the claim…that the company was knowingly  complicit in, and thus liable for, the atrocities committed  by the AUC in Uraba while on the Chiquita payroll,' said  Arturo Carrillo, director of George Washington University's  International Human Rights Clinic, which is representing  plaintiffs in one of the suits. 'One can only hope that the revealing information obtained  and published by the NSA will lead to greater accountability  for Chiquita's criminal actions in Colombia,' Carillo said,  'since the company's plea agreement with the Justice  Department, which has refused to prosecute Chiquita  executives for wrongdoing, amounts to little more than a  slap on the corporate wrist. '