Latin America has displaced traditional high-rollers,  including the Middle East and Europe, as the region  registering the largest percentage increase in military  spending last year, according to a new study released by the  Stockholm International Peace Research Institute (SIPRI). The increase in real terms was 5. 8 percent for Latin America  compared with 5. 2 percent for Africa, 2. 8 for North America,  2. 5 for the Middle East and 1. 4 percent for Asia. In Europe, the only region to register a fall, military  spending in 2010 declined by 2. 8 percent in real terms  compared with 2009. The high spenders in Latin America include Brazil, Chile,  Colombia and Peru. Asked why a region with hardly any ongoing conflicts  accounted for such a high percentage increase, Carina  Solmirano, a researcher at SIPRI's Military Expenditure and  Arms Production Programme told IPS, 'I would say the rise in  military spending in countries like Brazil and Chile is  mostly associated with aspirations for a stronger regional  and international presence, but without necessarily being a  reflection of competing military power. 'Still, in sheer numbers, Latin America spent only about 63. 3  billion dollars on its military last year compared with 721  billion dollars by North America, 382 billion dollars by  Europe, 317 billion dollars by Asia, 111 billion dollars by  the Middle East and 30 billion dollars by Africa, according  to the SIPRI report. The study also says part of the explanation for this rise in  Latin America is to be found in the strong economic growth  the region has experienced in recent years, while in other  regions the effects of the global economic recession caused  military spending to fall or at least rise more slowly in  2010. Solmirano said the Latin American region does not face any  major military threat and the reasons for these increases  need to be found elsewhere.  For example, she pointed out  that Brazil has been actively seeking a larger role in  international politics and longs for a permanent seat on the  U. N.  Security Council. It is also a regional economic power and in some ways, the  leader in the region, Solmirano said.  In Chile, on the other hand, the military has benefited from  increasing revenues from copper exports, which explains why  the country has been able to acquire such sophisticated  armaments in the last years. 'As we say in the report, if the copper law is eliminated,  it's very likely we will start witnessing a slowdown in arms  imports,' Solmirano said. According to the 'Secret Copper Law', which has now been  abolished, about 10 percent of copper revenues were diverted  specifically for arms purchases. The law is being replaced by a new system to fund arms  purchases, likely to be administered by the Ministry of  Finance. Chile, unlike Brazil, is not necessarily aspiring to become  a major world power, but it certainly seeks to have an  important regional role — both diplomatic and economic - in  the affairs of South America, she added. While geopolitics is primarily behind Brazil's rising  military expenditures, internal security threats have  prompted Colombia and Peru to bolster their defence  spending. The increases in military spending are not only for arms  purchases but also for the sustenance of the armed forces. A notable feature of military expenditures in Latin America  is that they tend to be dominated by personnel expenditures,  which typically comprise 50-70 percent of the budget,  according to the report. Argentina, for example, increased its military spending by  6. 6 percent in 2010, largely due to increases in salaries. Solmirano said that Venezuela, for the second consecutive  year, has witnessed a reduction of its military spending in  real terms and the fall is associated with the country's  negative economic growth.  While almost all the economies in  South America grew during 2010, Venezuela's contracted. However, it is too soon to tell if the fall in military  expenditure is going to continue in the future, she added.   'Depending on how Venezuela's economy performs in the next  years, we may witness new increases.  But again, it's very  hard to predict. 'As for Argentina, the country's increase in military  spending has been applied to personnel costs, while the  share for arms acquisitions has been very low, Solmirano  said. In fact, Argentina's military equipment is so outdated that  some experts have suggested the need to increase the share  for arms acquisitions before all the equipment becomes  obsolete. The Argentine Ministry of Defence indicated last year that  there will be increases in the upcoming years to modernise  the armed forces.  Meanwhile, in light of the increasing trend in military  spending across Latin America, there have been renewed calls  in 2010 to improve transparency in military expenditure and  arms acquisitions. The Organisation of American States (OAS) and Union of South  American Nations (UNASUR) made commitments to strengthen  existing transparency mechanisms, such as the Inter-American  Convention on Transparency in Arms Acquisitions - and for  member states to regularly report their military spending  and arms acquisitions to the U. N. 's annual Arms Register. The study also points out that some neighbouring countries  in South America have also made bilateral agreements to  harmonise the reporting of their military expenditure — such  as Ecuador and Peru, and Peru and Chile - as a way to build  confidence and create more transparency.  Dr.  Samuel Perlo-Freeman, senior researcher and head of  SIPRI's Military Expenditure Project, told IPS that  generally speaking, the majority of military spending is for  recurrent expenses, that is personnel (salaries and benefits  etc. ), and ongoing operational costs (peacetime costs, e. g.   training, upkeep, maintenance etc.  as well as actual  military operations). However, the share that is devoted to spending on equipment  and capital spending - including procurement, research and  development (R&D) and military construction - varies  enormously. In major industrialised countries with significant arms  industries, it is often around 30 percent, or a little more  in some cases, while in some less developed countries with  very limited resources for major arms purchases, it may be  as little as five to 10 percent, he said. 