Cote d'Ivoire's Laurent Gbagbo has surrendered to the forces  of presidential claimant Alassane Ouattara and is being held  by them, the U. N.  has said. 'The United Nations mission in Cote d'Ivoire has confirmed  that former President Laurent Gbagbo has surrendered to the  forces of Alassane Ouattara and is currently in their  custody,' U. N.  spokesman Farhan Haq said on Monday. Haq said the U. N.  mission in Cote d'Ivoire, known as UNOCI,  was 'providing protection and security in accordance with  its mandate'. Ouattara, the internationally recognised winner of a Nov.  28  presidential poll, said in a short televised address that  his government would be initiating legal proceedings against  Gbagbo, and that all due measures will be taken to ensure  the former president's physical security. He also urged Ivorians to 'abstain from all acts of reprisal  or violence', and said he wanted to establish a 'truth and  reconciliation commission'. Youssoufou Bamba, the Ouattara-appointed Ivorian ambassador  to the U. N. , told Al Jazeera that Gbagbo was being held at  an undisclosed location for his own safety.  He also  indicated that the Ivorian government could move the  International Criminal Court to try Gbagbo for alleged  crimes against humanity. Early reports said Gbagbo was arrested after a raid by  French forces on a bunker at his residence in Abidjan. Toussaint Alain, a Gbagbo advisor, told Reuters that the  incumbent president had been 'arrested by French special  forces in his residence' and 'handed over to the rebel  leaders'.  Jean Marc Simon, the French ambassador to Cote d'Ivoire,  said the operation was carried out by soldiers loyal to  Ouattara. A Ouattara spokesman told Al Jazeera that Gbagbo, along with  his wife and several advisors, was being held at the Golf  Hotel, which has been Ouattara's headquarters since a  disputed presidential poll in late November. Gbagbo was 'alive and well', according to Youssoufou Bamba,  Cote d'Ivoire's ambassador to the U. N. , and would be  'brought to justice for the crimes he has committed'. Gbagbo later appeared on a pro-Ouattara television station  to call for an end to fighting in the country. 'I want us to lay down arms and to enter the civilian part  of the crisis, which should be completed rapidly for life in  the country to resume,' he said, during a brief statement. Earlier, the same station showed footage of Gbagbo and his  wife being brought into the Golf Hotel shortly after news of  his capture broke.  Footage of him receiving medical  treatment was also shown. Guillaume Soro, Ouattara's appointed prime minister, has  asked the population to remain calm. Soro said Gbagbo's forces should join Ouattara's Republican  Guard at once to avoid a manhunt. 'To all the forces, I make a last appeal to rally (with us)  . . .  there cannot be a manhunt,' Soro said in an address to  the Ivorian people carried by French television station i- tele.  'Join the Republican forces!'Abdon Bayeto, a Gbagbo representative in the UK, meanwhile,  termed the capture a 'coup d'etat, perpetrated by France'. He said that Gbagbo's supporters would 'continue the  struggle'. Gbagbo's surrender comes after 10 days of heavy fighting in  Abidjan, and months of a bitter political crisis. Both sides have been accused of human rights abuses by  international organisations, and the U. N.  says at least 800  people have died. Issiaka Konate, a London-based leader of Ouattara's party,  told Al Jazeera that 'people will pay for all crimes  committed in Ivory Coast', responding to a question  regarding rights abuse allegations levelled by Human Rights  Watch against pro-Ouattara forces. Al Jazeera's Haru Mutasa, in Abidjan, reported that the city  was tense following the arrest, with neighbourhoods around  the presidential residence completely deserted, while those  around the Golf Hotel were beginning to fill up with armed  Ouattara supporters. As news filtered through to citizens of the country's  commercial capital, however, scenes of jubilant celebration  were seen in several pro-Ouattara neighbourhoods. Ouattara to decideNicolas Sarkozy, the French president, spoke with Ouattara  on the telephone at length shortly after Gbagbo's arrest,  the Elysee palace said. The U. N.  Security Council received a briefing from Alain Le  Roy, its Under Secretary-General and Head of Peacekeeping,  at the body's headquarters in New York following Gbagbo's  capture. Briefing the media after the meeting, Le Roy said that UNOCI  was acting under its mandate by now providing security to  Gbagbo, who he said requested the protection himself. 'It is up to President Ouattara to decide . . .  what he wants  to do with former president Gbagbo,' Le Roy said. He also warned that the crisis in Cote d'Ivoire was not  over, even though an 'important step' had been taken to end  the violence. In a statement, Barack Obama, the U. S.  president, said the  United States 'welcomes the decisive turn of events in Cote  d'Ivoire', and that Ouattara must now focus on governing 'on  behalf of all the people . . .  including those who did not  vote for him'. Ban Ki-moon, the U. N.  secretary-general, said the  international community still had a role to play in the  country. 'We have to help them to restore stability, rule of law and  address all humanitarian and security issues,' he said. French assaultEarlier on Monday, a column of more than 30 French armoured  vehicles and tanks were seen advancing towards Gbagbo's  residence.  Two tanks took positions at a key intersection,  while the rest of the vehicles advanced on the compound. Forces loyal to Gbagbo were seen fleeing the area, as the  French forces advanced. Meanwhile, forces loyal to Ouattara attacked positions  around the state television station - which was still  controlled by Gbagbo - and his home. A French military representative denied that French  operations on the presidential residence had been co- ordinated with Ouattara's forces. Clashes between French and pro-Gbagbo forces were also  reported from around the nearby Plateau business district. Early in the day and through Sunday night, U. N.  and French  helicopters fired rockets at Gbagbo's residence in Abidjan. At the time, Ban Ki-moon, the U. N.  secretary-general, said  he had given orders to use 'all necessary means' to stop  Gbagbo's heavy weapons. Speaking to Al Jazeera on Sunday, U. N.  spokesman Hamadoun  Toure said U. N.  helicopters were only targeting heavy  weapons sites and not Gbagbo himself. 'We are not trying to take control of his residence . . .  Our  objective is not to capture anybody,' Toure said. *Published under an agreement with Al-Jazeera. 