The Pakistani military's recent demands on the United States  to curb drone strikes and reduce the number of U. S.  spies  operating in Pakistan, which have raised tensions between the  two countries to a new high, were a response to U. S.  military  and intelligence programmes that had gone well beyond what the  Pakistanis had agreed to in past years. The military leadership had reached private agreements in  the past on both the drone strikes and on U. S.  intelligence  activities in Pakistan, but both had changed dramatically in  ways that threatened the interests of Pakistan.  The Pakistani military, which holds real power over matters  of national security in Pakistan, is now insisting for the  first time that Washington must observe strict limits on  both the use of drone strikes and on the number of U. S.   military and intelligence personnel and contractors in the  country.  And they have backed up that demand with a suspension of  joint intelligence operations with the United States — a  programme that had been strongly sought after by the Barack  Obama administration. The new Pakistani demands for restrictions on U. S.   operations are being taken seriously by the United States,  because it was Pakistan's Army chief, Gen.  Ashfaq Kayani,  who communicated them to U. S.  officials, as reported by the  New York Times Monday. The detention of U. S.  contract spy Raymond Davis for killing  three Pakistani citizens in January was a turning point in  U. S. -Pakistani relations.  But it was only the occasion for  the Pakistani military leadership and its Inter-Services  Intelligence (ISI) to take a much stronger position on  larger issues that concerned them, according to Kamran  Bokhari, a specialist on Pakistan for the consulting firm  STRATFOR.  'What we're seeing is ISI and the Pakistani state take  advantage of the Davis affair to renegotiate the rules of  the game with the United States,' Bokhari told IPS in an  interview.  The first move by the Pakistani military and ISI after Davis  was detained was to suspend joint intelligence operations  between ISI and the CIA, which had been successful in  capturing a number of high-ranking Taliban leaders in early  2010. That suspension was kept quiet for months by both sides  until it was leaked by a ranking ISI official to Reuters  last weekend.  It was understood by U. S.  officials as a bid  by the Pakistanis to force serious changes in U. S.  covert  activities on Pakistani soil. But Pakistan's tough line on Davis and on the joint  intelligence operations clearly got the attention of the  Obama administration.  U. S.  drone strikes were suspended in  January and February while U. S.  officials sought to resolve  both issues.  During the Musharraf administration, the Pakistani military  had reached a private understanding with the George W.  Bush  administration on the use of drones against al Qaeda and its  Pakistani allies. But military and intelligence officials had watched with  growing concern as the drone programme shifted from  targeting high level al Qaeda and Pakistani Taliban  officials to the rank and file members and supporters of  either Afghan or Pakistani Taliban organisations.  Pakistani officials had privately sought to convince the  Obama administration to narrow its targeting.  Senior  Pakistani officials had complained that the CIA was  increasingly killing 'mere foot soldiers', as reported in a  Feb.  21 story by The Washington Post's Greg Miller. Within hours after Davis was released, however, the drone  strikes resumed, as if to make the point that the U. S.  had  no intention of altering its strategy of reliance on the  drones.  Then on Mar.  17, a drone strike on a gathering in North  Waziristan killed more than 40 people, including some  Taliban members but mostly tribal elders and members of the  local government militia force.  The tribesmen and elders  were meeting in a jirga to discuss the issue of payment for  the sale of a chromite mine by the Madda Khel tribe,  according to local officials. One tribal elder who lost four relatives in the bombing said  44 people were killed, including 13 children. The Pakistani military could hardly be insensitive to the  fact that tribal leaders across the North Waziristan region  were calling for revenge against the United States after the  Mar.  17 bloodbath.  'We are a people who wait 100 years to  exact revenge.  We never forgive our enemy,' the elders said  in a statement issued immediately after the bombing. It also outraged public opinion all across Pakistan, where  the drone war has created growing anger at the United  States.  Kayani himself issued a strong statement condemning that  strike as 'intolerable' and said it made it more difficult  for the military to fight terrorism.  Pakistani officials had  long been saying both publicly and privately that the  programme had become 'counterproductive', but it was the  first time Kayani himself had weighed in. In the past, Pakistani military and government complaints  about drone strikes were 'hypocritical', said Anatol Lieven,  a specialist at Kings College, Cambridge, and the author of  a new book on Pakistan.  But Lieven told IPS the Pakistani military leadership  appears to have been 'seriously annoyed' by that March drone  strike and its large number of civilian casualties, because  'it was such a public insult'.  'The Pakistanis are in a deeply humiliating position' in  regard to the drone strikes, said Lieven.  He said the  military leadership no longer trusts the Americans' judgment  on the programme, in part because the strikes are killing  people in North Waziristan who are willing to make a deal to  end their fight against the Pakistani military and  government. The Pakistani military's demand beginning after the Davis  arrest that the United States reduce the number of CIA and  Special Operations Forces personnel in Pakistan by 25 to 40  percent, as reported by the New York Times Monday, was a  response to a dramatic increase in the number of such  personnel entering the country without explicit agreement  from the Pakistani military, according to Lieven.  'What the Pakistanis are demanding is a rollback of a huge  influx that has occurred in recent months,' Lieven told IPS.   'They are for a return to the status quo of last year. ' They  are specifically complaining about more U. S.  personnel who  had come into the country without explicit permission, said  Lieven. The United States had increased the number of 'unilateral'  intelligence personnel in Pakistan - those who were not  specifically involved in joint intelligence efforts - by at  least a few hundred in late 2010 and early 2011.  Lieven said some U. S.  officials had privately agreed that  the U. S.  spying in Pakistan 'has gotten seriously out of  hand'. The Kings College scholar said he has been assured by  Pakistani intelligence officials that they are committed to  helping prevent any attack against the United States from  Pakistani territory, because 'the consequences would be  disastrous for Pakistan if there were ever an attack. 'But that does not apply to the Afghan Taliban presence in  Pakistan.  'The Pakistanis have been giving very little help  on Afghanistan,' he said.  And that is one reason the U. S.   had increased the number of intelligence agents in Pakistan. *Gareth Porter is an investigative historian and journalist  specialising in U. S.  national security policy.  The paperback  edition of his latest book, 'Perils of Dominance: Imbalance  of Power and the Road to War in Vietnam', was published in  2006. 