The international contact group on Libya has agreed to set up  a temporary 'trust fund' to help the international community  channel assets to the opposition Transitional National Council  in Benghazi. In a statement issued at the conclusion of Wednesday's one- day summit in Doha, Qatar, the group united to call on  Libya's longterm leader Muammar Gaddafi to step down. 'Gaddafi and his regime has lost all legitimacy and he must  leave power allowing the Libyan people to determine their  own future,' the group said. The financial mechanism being set up will allow  international donations to be made - possibly from frozen  assets of the Gaddafi administration - and made directly  available to Gaddafi's opponents.  The group warned that up to 3. 6 million people in Libya  could require humanitarian assistance as the result of weeks  of fighting in the country. Members of the group have called for more pressure to be  exerted against Gaddafi's regime, but they disagree on  whether to arm the rebels seeking to eject him. Al Jazeera correspondent James Bays said some participants  had 'deep concerns' about providing Libyan rebels, who are  fighting to topple Gaddafi from power, with access to funds. 'I spoke to the German foreign minister [Guido Westerwelle]  and he had concerns over whether it was legal or not,' our  correspondent said. 'Statements from the UK and Qatar have agreed that the  situation in Benghazi is urgent.  And most is due to a lack  of cash - it's not all about heavy weapons for frontline  fighters; it's also about being able to pay public servants  and getting schools back open. 'After the conference, Sheikh Hamad bin Jassim bin Jaber bin  Muhammad Al Thani, Qatar's prime minister, said that Gaddafi  must step down. 'Those around him should advise him that it is in the best  interests of Libya,' he said.  'This is the ideal scenario,  for the safety of everyone - including himself and his  family. 'Sending weapons to BenghaziThe Qatari prime minister also didn't rule out arming anti- Gaddafi rebels. 'Qatar starts by providing humanitarian supplies, including  heating gas and other supplies.  We have also taken 6,000  refugees.  For all other needs, Qatar . . .  will make things  available for the Libyan people to defend themselves. 'William Hague, British foreign secretary, told Al Jazeera  that arming Benghazi-based fighters would not be contrary to  international law. 'The U. N.  resolutions do allow for the provision of  weapons,' he said.  'But we are making our contribution  through our own military, as well as providing non-lethal  support, such as communications equipment. 'He earlier told reporters that 'the arms embargo applies to  all of Libya, but it is appropriate to equip people with  what is needed to protect themselves'.  Franco Frattini, Italy's foreign minister, went further. 'Gaddafi's tactics are to put tanks in the streets - and we  cannot have air strikes against people in the city streets,  in the squares, in the highly populated areas,' he said. 'Either we make it possible for these people to defend  themselves, or we withdraw our claims of support. 'However, in an apparent rift between EU partners on Libya,  Steven Vanackere, the Belgian foreign minister earlier said  his country was opposed to the idea. 'The U. N.  resolution speaks about protecting civilians, not  arming them,' he said. Qatar 'an oil corporation'The Libyan government has dismissed the talks and Qatar's  role in the ongoing conflict. 'We are very hopeful that the American people and the  American government will not buy into the Qatari lies and  Qatari schemes,' a spokesman of the Libyan regime told  reporters in Tripoli on Tuesday. 'Qatar is hardly a partner of any kind.  It's more of an oil  corporation than a true nation,' the spokesman said. Among those who arrived in the country ahead of the Doha  talks was Moussa Koussa, Libya's former foreign minister,  who fled to Britain last month.  He did not take part in the  formal meeting, but was understood to have met with various  officials on the sidelines of the conference. Mustafa Gheriani, a media liaison official for the  opposition, said Koussa was 'not connected to (the rebel)  Transitional National Council in any way or shape'. Gheriani added that he was personally surprised to learn  that Koussa was leaving Britain to attend the Qatar talks,  and suggested that British officials should explain why he  was going and in what capacity. 'Free individual'Koussa, the most prominent Libyan government defector,  sought refuge in Britain on Mar.  30.  A friend said he quit  in protest at attacks on civilians by Gaddafi's forces. The former spy chief was questioned by Scottish police over  the 1988 Lockerbie airliner bombing, which killed 270  people, but the British government said he was now free to  travel. In his first public statement since arriving in Britain,  Koussa told the BBC on Monday his country could become 'a  new Somalia' unless all sides involved in the conflict  stopped it from descending into civil war. *Published under an agreement with Al Jazeera. 