U. N.  Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon admitted Monday he is not  empowered to establish an international war crimes tribunal to  probe the 'serious violations' of international humanitarian  and human rights law committed during the concluding stages of  the decades-long conflict in Sri Lanka in May 2009. Ban has been advised this will require host country consent - in this  case the consent of the Sri Lankan government - or a decision by  member states through an appropriate intergovernmental forum such as  the General Assembly, the Security Council or the Human Rights  Council. Still, the secretary-general says he has 'consistently held the view  that Sri Lanka should, first and foremost, assume responsibility for  ensuring accountability for the alleged violations. 'The Sri Lanka government is not likely to give its consent to any  investigations of war crimes charges. As a result, it will be left to one of the three intergovernmental  bodies to decide on any course of action or act on the  recommendations of the panel. The three-member panel, which submitted its 196-page report to Ban  last week, recommended he 'should immediately proceed to establish an  independent international mechanism' to investigate allegations of  violations both by the government of Sri Lanka and the Liberation  Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE). The panel declared that some of allegations 'amount to war crimes and  crimes against humanity. 'The report provides details of these allegations - including  photographs and satellite imagery of civilian targets bombed during  the conflict - which have been vehemently denied by the Sri Lankan  government. The LTTE, which has also been subject to severe criticism by the  panel, is accused of executing civilians tantamount to war crimes. 'The conduct of war represented a grave assault on the entire regime  of international law designed to protect individual dignity during  both war and peace,' the report said. The government made an unsuccessful attempt last week to convince the  secretary-general not to release the report, even though large  portions of it were leaked to the Sri Lankan media. A statement attributed to the U. N.  spokesperson said: 'The decision  to release the report was made as a matter of transparency and in the  broader public interest. 'A copy of the report was shared with the Sri Lankan government,  through its Permanent Mission to the United Nations, on Apr.  12. Although Ban indicated his willingness to publicise the government's  response alongside the report, Sri Lanka did not avail itself of this  opportunity. 'The government has not responded to this offer which nonetheless  still stands,' U. N.  spokesperson Martin Nesirky said Monday. One of the first recommendations of the panel was to call on the Sri  Lankan government to respond to the 'serious allegations' of war  crimes 'by initiating an effective accountability process beginning  with genuine investigations. 'Asked for his comments, Sri Lanka's Permanent Representative to the  United Nations Ambassador Palitha Kohona told IPS, 'It is  disappointing that a report made to the secretary-general, funded  from his emergency fund, and not authorised by any legislative organ  of the United Nations should have been made public in this fashion. 'He pointed out that the secretary-general had also consistently said  the panel would only provide advice to him. 'The publication of this report in this manner, considering that it  has strayed way outside its mandate, is also an unfair interference  in the work of the Lessons Learned and Reconciliation Commission  (LLRC) in Sri Lanka,' Kohona said. The LLRC, which was appointed by the government to probe some of the  allegations, has not completed its own investigations. But human rights groups have criticised the LLRC as lacking  credibility. The panel says the LLRC 'fails to satisfy key international standards  of independence and impartiality, as it is compromised by its  composition and deep-seated conflicts of interests of some of its  members. 'In a statement released here, the secretary-general said he will  respond positively to the panel's recommendation for a review of the  United Nations actions regarding the implementation of its  humanitarian and protection mandates during the war in Sri Lanka  particularly in the last stages. The exact modality of such a review will be determined after  consultations with relevant U. N.  agencies, funds and programmes. Responding to reports that the Sri Lankan government was encouraging  mass protests against the United Nations during an upcoming May Day  rally next week, Ban said he trusts the government of Sri Lanka will  continue to respect the work of the U. N.  and its agencies as well as  its obligations to the safety of U. N.  staff in Colombo. 'He regrets the inflammatory tone of some of the recent public  statements emanating from Sri Lanka,' the statement added. 'The secretary-general sincerely hopes that this advisory report will  make a contribution to full accountability and justice so that the  Sri Lankan Government and people will be able to proceed towards  national reconciliation and peace,' it added. The three-member panel comprised Marzuki Darusman of Indonesia  (chair), Yasmin Sooka of South Africa and Steven Ratner of the United  States. The panel, which began its work last September, was created by Ban to  advise him on 'accountability issues' with respect to the concluding  stages of a bloody three-decades-old conflict, which ended in May  2009. The Sri Lankan government repeatedly took the position the U. N.   charter does not provide the secretary-general the legitimate right  to appoint a panel of experts to probe human rights violations. The creation of the panel was also not authorised by the Human Rights  Council, the General Assembly or the Security Council. The government successfully battled a ruthless terrorist  organisation, the LTTE, which was fighting for a separate nation  state in the north and the east of the war-ravaged country. 