Starting in late 2005, U. S.  and NATO forces in Afghanistan  began turning detainees over to the Afghan National  Directorate of Security (NDS), despite its well-known  reputation for torture. Interviews with former U. S.  and NATO diplomats and other evidence now  available show that United States and other NATO governments become  complicit in NDS torture of detainees for two distinctly different  reasons. For the European members of NATO - especially the British and Dutch -  the political driver was the need to distance themselves from a U. S.   detainee policy already tainted by accounts of U. S.  torture.  The U. S.  and Canada supported such transfers, however, in the belief  that NDS interrogators could get better intelligence from the  detainees. The transfers to the NDS were a direct violation of the United  Nations Convention against Torture, which forbids the transfer of any  person by a State Party to 'another State where there are substantial  grounds for believing that he would be in danger of being subjected  to torture. ' The first official shift in policy was the adoption by NATO in  December 2005 of a '96-hour rule' requiring transfer of Afghan  detainees to the Afghan government within four days.  The British and Dutch unwillingness to continue turning their  detainees over to the United States was in response to published  reports of U. S.  torture of detainees at a secret detention facility  at Bagram airbase. Ronald Neumann, then U. S.  ambassador to Afghanistan, told IPS the  'initial impetus' for the 96-hour rule came from the 'discomfort' of  the British and Dutch about 'being associated with U. S.  handling of  detainees'. A former NATO diplomat who served in Afghanistan at the time  confirmed Neumann's recollection.  'The British and Dutch privately  expressed their concerns that perceptions of U. S.  detainee policy  could damage the mission,' he said.  But under the new 96-hour rule, the detainees were turned over the  NDS, which had long had a reputation for torturing suspected enemies  of the state, starting when it was the secret police and intelligence  agency during the Soviet occupation.  That reputation had continued  under the government of President Hamid Karzai.   The impetus for the U. S.  and Canadian forces in Afghanistan to  transfer detainees to the NDS, however, was the desperate need for  intelligence on the Taliban. By the time U. S.  and Canadian military commanders began large-unit  sweeps in areas where the Taliban had been operating in 2004-2005,  the George W.  Bush administration had already decided to consider all  Afghans in detention as 'unlawful combatants'.   But most of the Afghans picked up in those sweeps were not Taliban  fighters.  After U. S.  and NATO forces began turning over detainees to  the NDS, the intelligence agency's chief Amrullah Saleh told NATO  officials that the agency had to release two-thirds of the detainees  who had been transferred to it, according to the NATO diplomat. Matt Waxman, the U. S.  deputy assistant secretary of defence for  detainee affairs until the end of 2005, recalled in an interview with  IPS that there had been 'a lot of concern both in the Pentagon and in  the field' about 'over-broad detention' in Afghanistan, but also  'counter-pressures' for 'more aggressive detention operations'.   U. S.  Ambassador Neumann told IPS that the U. S.  military turned  detainees over to the NDS because of 'the intelligence benefit and so  we didn't have a revolving door' — a reference to the fact that many  detainees who had been turned over to local authorities had been set  free.  In an interview with the Ottawa Citizen published May 16, 2007,  Canadian Brig.  Gen.  Jim Ferron, then the intelligence chief for  NATO's International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) command in  Afghanistan, referred to the intelligence motive for both detention  and transferring detainees to NDF.  'The detainees are detained for a reason,' said Ferron.  'They have  information we need. ' But he complained that much of the information provided by detainees  was 'not truthful and is aimed at deceiving military forces'.   Ferron  explained that detainees went through 'basic questioning' by NATO  interrogators about 'why they joined the insurgency' and the  information was then turned over to NDS.  Ferron clearly implied that the NDS interrogators could do a better  job of getting the truth out of the detainees than NATO  interrogators.  The 'best information' was what was being gleaned by  the NDS, he said, and ISAF 'would like to make it more a part of our  daily intelligence'. Ferron said senior NDS officials had assured him that 'detainees are  treated humanely. ' But only three weeks earlier, the Toronto Globe  and Mail had published a series of investigative articles based on  interviews with detainees turned over by the Canadians who had been  tortured by NDS.  Even though they had just initiated the 96-hour rule under which  detainees were turned over to NDS, British and Dutch diplomats were  very concerned about the NDS reputation for torture, according to the  NATO diplomat.  'They knew if they turned their detainees over to the  Afghans, they would be tortured,' recalled the diplomat. Largely because of their awareness of the risk of NDS torture, the  British and Dutch turned over relatively few detainees, according to  the NATO diplomat. The British and Dutch also joined with U. S.  officials in trying to  get the Afghan government to shift responsibility for detainees from  NDS to the Afghan Ministry of Defence, the NATO diplomat recalled.   But there were two problems: under Afghan law, there was no provision  for long-term legal internment, and a 1987 Afghan law gave NDS the  responsibility for handling security cases through its own 'security  courts'.  The U. S.  and its two European NATO allies wanted President Hamid  Karzai to remove those legal obstacles to long-term detention by the  Defence Ministry.  'The idea was that Karzai would declare a state of  emergency, so the government could hold people for the length of the  conflict,' the diplomat said.   The plan also envisioned the renovation of the Pul-I Charkhi prison  to add a new wing for security detainees, for which the Ministry of  Defence would be responsible. But Karzai refused to declare a state of emergency, according to the  NATO diplomat, because he didn't want to make concessions to the  Afghan parliament to get it.  Meanwhile, Defence Minister Abdul Rahim  Wardak 'wanted nothing to do with detainee policy', said the NATO  diplomat.  In early November 2007, a detainee turned over to the NDS by Canadian  forces told Canadian diplomats in an NDS jail in Kandahar in early  November 2007 that he had been beaten with an electrical cable and a  rubber hose, and the Canadians found the torture instruments nearby.  The Canadian government then halted its transfers of detainees to the  NDS.  And in February 2008, Amnesty International called on NATO  defence ministers to suspend all transfers of detainees from ISAF to  Afghan authorities, given the substantial risk of torture and ill- treatment.  Despite that appeal, however, the United States continued to transfer  its detainees to NDS.  During 2009, ISAF transferred a total of 350 detainees to NDS,  according to official data provided to IPS by a knowledgeable U. S.   source.  An even more detainees were transferred to NDS by U. S.  troops  operating separately from the NATO command, according to the source.   *Gareth Porter is an investigative historian and journalist  specialising in U. S.  national security policy.  The paperback edition  of his latest book, 'Perils of Dominance: Imbalance of Power and the  Road to War in Vietnam', was published in 2006. 