Libya's opposition fighters are battling Muammar Gaddafi's  forces on the country's western border, while fighting  continues in the besieged city of Misurata. Pro-democracy forces said the Libyan army withdrew from central  Misurata, but fierce fighting was still ongoing for control of the  city's port on Wednesday. 'Gaddafi's forces retreated from the port area where they were  positioned yesterday after air strikes by the NATO forces.  The strikes completely destroyed 37 military  vehicles,' an opposition spokesman, called Reda, told the Reuters  news agency. 'Gaddafi's forces this morning started bombarding an area about 10km  north of the city.  It is known as the Steel area… The bombardment is  still going on.  They are using Grad missiles . . .  Warplanes are flying  over Misurata's outskirts but I don't hear any sound of strikes,' he  said by telephone. While government forces pulled out of the city over the weekend under  pressure from NATO air attacks, they have since unleashed a heavy  bombardment on the city, the only major western city in opposition  hands. 'Another development which is rather disturbing is that there has  been shelling in the docks area, which is the lifeline to opposition  forces and indeed the civilian population here,' Al Jazeera's Andrew  Simmons reported from Misurata. 'Reports from an opposition spokesperson say pro-Gaddafi troops are  intent to cut the main road from city to the port.  If the lifeline is  cut then everyone is in a desperate situation. 'Though Gaddafi troops have left the city everybody is under threat  of shellfire.  The whole city centre has been destroyed and needs to  be rebuilt. 'Migrant workers strandedAmid the tension, thousands of migrant workers have been left  stranded in Misurata, waiting for relief organisations to ship them  to safety. One ship sent to evacuate a thousand migrants from the city docked on  Wednesday in the port after spending a night offshore awaiting a lull  in shelling, the aid agency International Organisation for Migration  (IOM) said. It said at least one migrant from Niger was reported killed and up to  20 others wounded in the bombardment of Misurata a day earlier. At least 1,500 migrants, most from sub-Saharan Africa including Niger  and Chad, have gathered at the port some 10-12 kms east of the city  awaiting rescue, the group said. It said tens of thousands of migrants, mainly from sub-Saharan  Africa, have fled the conflict in Libya into northern Niger and Chad,  and are in need of urgent support. Fears of stalemateWith fears of a stalemate in the Libyan conflict looming, Liam Fox,  British defence secretary, met Robert Gates, the U. S.  defence  secretary, in Washington on Tuesday. 'We discussed how situation is progressing.  Thanks for Predator  drones made available by the United States.  Also there has been  progress in Misurata and the Gaddafi regime is on the back foot,' Fox  said. 'We've seen some momentum gained in the last few days. 'Libya, for its part, has urged Russia to call an emergency meeting of  the U. N.  Security Council to discuss what it called 'Western  aggression'. Vladmir Putin, the Russian prime minister, has criticised the NATO- led coalition no-fly zone over Libya and said it had no mandate to  kill Gaddafi.  'Gaddafi not targeted'However, the U. S.  defence secretary said the coalition was not  targeting Gaddafi specifically, despite hitting one of his compounds  with a recent air strike. 'The same values and principles apply to all countries.  Our response  to each country has to be tailored on the prevailing situation in  each country,' Gates said. 'There was a degree of international support for the Libya air  strikes.  The Arab League passed a resolution in support of no-fly  zone and later the U. N.  also backed it. 'Meanwhile, U. S.  senator John McCain, the highest profile American  politician to visit Libya since the start of the conflict, called for  the use of more air power to prevent what he called a humanitarian  crisis in Libya. 'If you are really in this to prevent a humanitarian disaster, the  only way you can prevent it is to have Gaddafi not able to inflict  it,' McCain told Al Jazeera. Meanwhile, the Obama administration has eased its sanctions against  Libya to allow for the sale of oil controlled by the rebels.  The move  will allow Libya's opposition forces to use the income from oil sales  to buy weapons and other supplies. The U. S.  also ordered the expenditure of up to 25 million dollars in  surplus government goods to support Libyan opposition groups and  protect civilians threatened by Gaddafi forces. In a related development, Italy said it would join the British and  French in carrying out bombing attacks on Libya. Geographically the closest major NATO member state to Libya, Italy  had until Monday only provided bases and reconnaissance and  monitoring aircraft.  The rebel-led the Libyan National Transitional  Council [NTC] welcomed the Italian decision. Separately, Italy and France called on the international community to  stop shipping oil products to the Libyan government and urged market  operators not to buy its crude oil. *Published under an agreement with Al-Jazeera. 