Sunday's killing of al Qaeda chief Osama bin Laden by a small,  helicopter-borne team of U. S.  Navy Seals could result in  significant impacts on U. S.  relations and strategy both in  Pakistan, where the raid was carried out, and neighbouring  Afghanistan, where it was launched, according to policy  experts here. Analysts agreed that the operation, which targeted a compound in a  wealthy suburb of Islamabad without prior consultation with Pakistani  officials, will likely worsen already-fraught ties with that country. They also agreed that the operation's success offers President Barack  Obama a chance to more fully embrace a counterterrorist (CT) strategy  in Afghanistan, as opposed to the more ambitious counterinsurgency  (COIN) and nation-building strategy pursued by the outgoing commander  there, Army Gen.  David Petraeus.  If so, the 100,000 troops currently  deployed there could be drawn down more quickly than has been  anticipated. Broadly hailed as a major victory for Washington in its nearly  decade-long pursuit of al Qaeda's leadership, most analysts here also  agreed that bin Laden's death could hasten the demise of al Qaeda  itself, even as threats posed by its affiliates in the Islamic world  are likely to persist for some time. 'With his demise, …it will take a long time for anyone to reclaim bin  Laden's influence in the salafi terrorist circles, regardless of who  and how quickly someone nominally replaces him at the head of al  Qaeda,' according to Vanda Felbab-Brown, a South Asia specialist at  the Brookings Institution, who described his status  and prestige among violent Islamists as 'almost mythical'. 'Bin Laden was the only al-Qaeda figure able to command the attention  of a mainstream Arab audience,' wrote Marc Lynch, an Arab public  opinion expert at George Washington University, on his foreignpolicy. com blog Monday. 'He remained uniquely charismatic and able to frame al-Qaeda's  narrative in ways which resonated with a broader Arab and Muslim  audience,' according to Lynch, who predicted that his death will only  briefly distract the Arab media's attention from the popular  uprisings that have both dominated the region over the past several  months and further marginalised al Qaeda's appeal for violent  resistance against the U. S.  and the West. Indeed, bin Laden's killing could actually give renewed momentum to  the so-called 'Arab Spring', according to Christopher Davidson, a  Gulf expert at Britain's Durham University.  While bin Laden himself had become 'little more than a figurehead' in  recent years, 'the impact of his death on authoritarian regimes in  Middle Eastern and other Islamic countries will be significant, as he  served an important and valuable role as a 'bogeyman' that could be  wheeled out to justify …why brutal crackdowns and limits on political  expression were often needed,' he said. For now, however, the biggest foreign policy implications of bin  Laden's killing — and the completely unilateral manner in which it  was carried out — appear to lie with Pakistan.  That bin Laden had been living for some time — possibly as many as  five years — in an unusually large and heavily fortified compound in  Abbottabad, a community 50 kms from Islamabad whose residents include  a disproportionate number of retired senior military officers,  confirmed to most analysts that at least some sectors of Pakistan's  government provided effective safe haven for Washington's 'Public  Enemy Number One'. 'We are very concerned that he was inside of Pakistan,' one senior  administration official told reporters in a telephone conference call  Sunday night immediately after Obama announced bin Laden's death. Public charges by senior U. S.  government and military officials that  Islamabad was not cooperating fully with Washington's  counterterrorism efforts had already become increasingly bold in the  weeks leading up to Sunday's raid.  And despite assurances by both  sides Monday that they remain close allies, the action seems certain  to worsen relations, according to virtually all analysts here. 'It strains credulity to say that Pakistani officials did not know  what was going on in the suburbs of Islamabad,' said Richard Haass,  president of the Council on Foreign Relations (CFR), in a  teleconference with reporters Monday.  'It suggests to me that this long-fraught and difficult relationship  will be entering yet another difficult phase moving forward,' he  said, suggesting that Washington will find it hard to justify  continued substantial aid to Islamabad — currently appropriated at  1. 5 billion dollars and over one billion dollars a year in non- military and military aid, respectively — unless confidence can be  restored. 'Pakistan essentially has a choice.  It either partners with the  United States much more completely, or it has to be prepared for the  United States to act independently,' according to Haass, who held  senior policy positions in both the George H. W.  and George W.  Bush  administrations. 'This will definitely worsen our relations with Pakistan,' said Col.   Pat Lang (ret. ), who served as the top Mideast and South Asia officer  at the Defence Intelligence Agency (DIA).  'But I don't see that we  can do anything about it; it's the Pakistanis that are moving away  from us and toward China, and that process will continue. 'Lang also noted that the success of the cross-border strike against  bin Laden may also provide an opportunity for Obama to reduce his  commitment to a 'nation-building' COIN strategy in Afghanistan in  favour of a CT strategy that would require many fewer troops on the  ground. That assessment was echoed by Haass, who has been critical of the  COIN strategy and its costs in blood and treasure in Afghanistan  since Obama agreed with Petraeus in November 2009 to increase U. S.   troop strength to 100,000 by late 2010. 'This will very much play into a growing debate as we move towards  Jul.  1 about the proper trajectory of U. S.  policy in Afghanistan in  general and more specifically the rate of drawdown of U. S.  forces,'  he said. Obama pledged in November 2009 to begin withdrawing U. S.  forces from  Afghanistan as of Jul.  1, 2011, but Petraeus has reportedly argued  for only a nominal reduction. 'I am hopeful that this provides closure to the American public for  9/11, and that closure provides some form of political backbone for  members of Congress to become more engaged in the debate on the war,'  said Matthew Hoh, director of the Afghanistan Study Group, who was deployed to  Afghanistan as a marine captain and then as a State Department  official. 'I'm also hopeful it will provide political space to President Obama  to allow him to pursue a serious de-escalation of the war,' he added. Patrick Cronin, a national security expert at the Center  for a New American Security, was even more emphatic in terms of  the potential strategic importance of the moment. 'The United States needs to further pivot from counterinsurgency,  which feeds the perception of occupation, to counterterrorism, which  requires a sharper discrimination between al Qaeda and the Taliban,'  he said. But COIN advocates warned against such a move.  Max Boot, a neo- conservative who has often given public voice to Petraeus's private  views, worried Monday that 'many Americans may decide that the threat  from al-Qaeda is (now) gone and that we can afford to draw down in  Afghanistan. ' Noting the continued existence in the region of a number of 'Islamist  terrorist groups', he argued on the CFR website that a 'comprehensive  counterinsurgency campaign in Afghanistan is still vital to prevent  that country from falling to Osama bin Laden's fellow travellers. 'Brookings' Felbab-Brown, meanwhile, argued that bin Laden's death  could enhance chances for a negotiated settlement with the Taliban in  Afghanistan. 'Despite their separate structures and al Qaeda's limited influence  over the Taliban's decision-making, bin Laden likely was a  significant force against the Taliban engaging in strategic  negotiations — not the least because the Taliban's disavowal of al  Qaeda has been a critical precondition and/or the essential desired  outcome of such negotiations,' she wrote on the Brookings' website. 'Bin Laden's demise may create a more permissive environment for  Taliban Central to make such a commitment, saying that whatever new  leadership emerges after bin Laden's death is not the same old al  Qaeda, with which the Taliban has not been willing to break for over  15 years. '*Jim Lobe's blog on U. S.  foreign policy can be read at  http://www. lobelog. com. 