When George W.  Bush rejected a Taliban offer to have Osama bin  Laden tried by a moderate group of Islamic states in mid- October 2001, he gave up the only opportunity the United  States would have to end bin Laden's terrorist career for the  next nine years. The al Qaeda leader was able to escape into Pakistan a few weeks  later, because the Bush administration had no military plan to capture  him. The last Taliban foreign minister, Wakil Ahmed Muttawakil, offered at  a secret meeting in Islamabad Oct.  15, 2001 to put bin Laden in the  custody of the Organization of the Islamic Conference (OIC), to  be tried for the 9/11 terror attacks on the United States, Muttawakil told IPS in an interview in Kabul last  year.  The OIC is a moderate, Saudi-based organisation representing all  Islamic countries.  A trial of bin Laden by judges from OIC member  countries might have dealt a more serious blow to al Qaeda's Islamic  credentials than anything the United States would have done with bin  Laden.   Muttawakil also dropped a condition that the United States provide  evidence of bin Laden's guilt in the 9/11 attacks, which had been  raised in late September and reiterated by Taliban Ambassador to  Pakistan Abdul Salam Zaeef on Oct.  5 - two days before the U. S.   bombing of Taliban targets began. There had been sketchy press reports at the time that the Taliban  foreign minister had made a new offer in Islamabad to have bin Laden  tried by one or more foreign countries.  No Taliban or former Taliban  official, however, had provided details of what had actually been  proposed until Muttawakil's revelation.  Muttawakil, who was detained at Bagram airbase for 18 months after the  ouster of the Taliban regime and now lives in Kabul with the approval  of the Hamid Karzai government, told IPS he had also offered a second  alternative - a 'special court' to try bin Laden that Afghanistan and  two other Islamic governments would establish. Muttawakil was believed by U. S.  officials to have had the trust of  Taliban leader Mullah Omar.  A December 1998 cable from the U. S.   Embassy in Islamabad said he was 'considered Omar's closest adviser on  political issues' and that he had become Omar's 'point man' on foreign  affairs in 1997.   The new Taliban negotiating offer came almost immediately after the  U. S.  began bombing Taliban targets on Oct.  7, 2001.  The fear of the  bombing — and what was likely to follow — evidently spurred the  Taliban leadership to be more forthcoming on bin Laden. But Bush brusquely rejected any talks on the Taliban proposal,  declaring, 'They must have not heard.  There's no negotiations. ' Bush rejected the Taliban offer despite the fact that U. S.   intelligence had picked up reports in the previous months of deep  divisions within the Taliban regime over bin Laden.  It was because of  those reports that Bush had authorised secret meetings by a CIA  officer with a high-ranking Taliban official in late September. Former CIA director George Tenet recalled in his memoirs that the  CIA station chief in Pakistan, Robert Grenier, met with Mullah Osmani,  the second ranking Taliban official, in Baluchistan province of  Pakistan. But Grenier was only authorised to offer Osmani three options: turning  bin Laden over to the United States; letting the Americans find him on  their own; or a third option, as Tenet described it, to 'administer  justice themselves, in a way that clearly took him off the table'. Osmani rejected those three options, as well as a subsequent proposal  by Grenier on Oct.  2 that he oust Mullah Omar from power and publicly  announce on the radio that bin Laden would be handed over to the  United States immediately. On Oct.  3, Bush publicly ruled out negotiations with the Taliban.  They  had to 'turn over the al Qaeda organisation living in Afghanistan and  must destroy the terrorist camps,' he said, adding 'There are no  negotiations. 'Milton Bearden, the former CIA station chief in Pakistan during the  Mujahideen war against the Soviets, observed to the Washington Post  two weeks after Bush had rejected Muttawakil's new offer that the  Taliban needed a face-saving way of resolving the issue consistent  with its Islamic values.  'We never heard what they were trying to say,' Bearden said. The Bush refusal to negotiate with the Taliban was in effect a free  pass for bin Laden and his lieutenants, because the Bush  administration had no plan of its own for apprehending bin Laden in  Afghanistan.  It did not even know what level of military effort would  have been required for the United States to be able to block bin  Laden's exit routes from Afghanistan into Pakistan. The absence of any military planning to catch bin Laden was a function  of Bush's national security team, led by Vice-President Dick Cheney  and Secretary of Defence Donald Rumsfeld, which had firmly opposed any  military operation in Afghanistan that would have had any possibility  of catching bin Laden and his lieutenants.  Rumsfeld and the second-ranking official at the Pentagon, Paul  Wolfowitz, had dismissed CIA warnings of an al Qaeda terrorist attack  against the United States in the summer of 2001, and even after 9/11  had continued to question the CIA's conclusion that bin Laden and al  Qaeda were behind the attacks.  Cheney and Rumsfeld were determined not to allow a focus on bin Laden  to interfere with their plan for a U. S.  invasion of Iraq to overthrow  the Saddam Hussein regime.  Even after Bush decided in favour of an Afghan campaign, CENTCOM  commander Tommy Franks, who was responsible for the war in  Afghanistan, was not directed to have a plan for bin Laden’s capture  or to block his escape to Pakistan.  When the CIA received intelligence on Nov.  12, 2001 that bin Laden had  left Kandahar and was headed for a cave complex in the Tora Bora  Mountains close to the Pakistani border, Franks had no assets in place  to do anything about it.  He asked Lt.  Gen.  Paul T.  Mikolashek,  commander of Army Central Command (ARCENT), if he could provide a  blocking force between al Qaeda and the Pakistani border, according to  Col.  David W.  Lamm, who was then commander of ARCENT Kuwait.  But that was impossible, because ARCENT had neither the troops nor the  strategic lift in Kuwait required to put such a force in place.  Franks then had to ask for Pakistani military help in blocking bin  Laden's exit into Pakistan, as Rumsfeld told a National Security  Council meeting, according to the meeting transcript in Bob Woodward's  book 'Bush at War'.  But Rumsfeld and other key advisers knew it would a charade, because  bin Laden was a long-time ally of the Pakistani intelligence service,  the ISI, and the Pakistani military was not about to help capture him.  Franks asked President Pervez Musharraf to deploy troops along the  Afghan-Pakistan border near Tora Bora, and Musharraf agreed to  redeploy 60,000 troops to the area from the border with India,  according to U. S.  Ambassador Wendy Chamberlin, who was present at the  meeting.  But the Pakistani president said his army would need airlift  assistance from the United States to carry out the redeployment.  That  would have required an entire aviation brigade, including hundreds of  helicopters, and hundreds of support troops to deliver that many  combat troops to the border region, according to Lamm. Those were assets the U. S.  military did not have in the theatre.  Osama bin Laden had been effectively guaranteed an exit to Pakistan by  a Bush policy that had rejected either diplomatic or military means to  do anything about him.  In an implicit acknowledgement that the administration had not been  seriously concerned with apprehending bin Laden, Bush declared in a  Mar.  13, 2002 press conference that bin Laden was 'a person who's now  been marginalised', and added, 'You know, I just don't spend that much  time on him…'*Gareth Porter is an investigative historian and journalist  specialising in U. S.  national security policy.  The paperback edition  of his latest book, 'Perils of Dominance: Imbalance of Power and the  Road to War in Vietnam', was published in 2006. 