The U. S.  discovery and killing of Osama bin Laden in a  compound some 50 kilometres from Islamabad is a 'defining  moment' for a U. S. -Pakistan relationship fraught with  duplicity and dashed expectations. U. S.  and Pakistani officials and foreign policy experts struggled  Tuesday to find something positive to say about the relationship  following bin Laden's dramatic denouement.  Some suggested that  Pakistan would now have to be more forthcoming in rolling up  remaining al Qaeda elements in the country and cutting back on  sanctuary for Afghan militants. Concerns mounted, however, that the fact that the al Qaeda leader had  found sanctuary in Abbottabad for as long as six years would destroy  what little trust remains between the two countries and dash hopes to  forge a long-term relationship anchored by 7. 5 billion dollars in  U. S.  economic aid over 10 years. U. S.  officials have not explicitly accused Pakistan of harbouring bin  Laden but said that it strains credulity to believe that the Saudi  fugitive — who had a 25-million-dollar price on his head - could have  stayed in an Islamabad suburb that is also home to Pakistan's most  prestigious military academy and numerous military retirees without,  as President Barack Obama's intelligence adviser John Brennan put it  Monday, 'some kind of support system'. On Tuesday, Carl Levin, a Michigan Democrat and chairman of the  Senate Armed Services Committee, told reporters, 'It's kind of hard  to imagine the [Pakistani] military or police did not have ideas  about what was going on inside [the compound]. 'The president of Pakistan, Asif Ali Zardari, denied the allegations  in a Washington Post op-ed, calling it 'baseless speculation'.  But  given the historic power of the military and Pakistani intelligence  services compared to elected civilian governments, it is possible,  even likely, that Zardari and much of the rest of his cabinet had no  knowledge of bin Laden's whereabouts until U. S.  Navy Seals entered  his hiding place. Shaukat Aziz, a former Pakistani prime minister, said Tuesday at a  conference of the Atlantic Council in Washington that this is a  'defining moment' for relations and that Pakistani officials must get  to the bottom of the bin Laden affair and find out 'what went right  and what went wrong'. He said the 'trust deficit' between the U. S.  and Pakistan was at 'its  highest level' since Pakistan's independence in 1947 and that it was  crucial to repair ties so that Pakistan could meet its enormous  economic and political challenges. Pakistan, with 100 million of its 170 million people under the age of  25, needs a growth rate of six to eight percent to provide jobs, Aziz  said.  Its current growth rate is only two to three percent and the  country has suffered devastating floods as well as domestic terrorist  attacks that have killed thousands of civilians, soldiers and police  over the past few years. The Obama administration has sought to bolster ties with a programme  for long-term aid.  However, Dov Zakheim, a former undersecretary of  defence and comptroller of the Pentagon under the George W.  Bush  administration, warned Tuesday that unless Pakistan showed more  cooperation in the fight against al Qaeda and in Afghanistan,  'Congress will cut back on the money. ''Congress has never really liked the Pakistanis,' Zakheim told the  Center for the National Interest, a Washington think tank.  By way of  illustration, he described how, after the 9-11 terrorist attacks, he  was told by then Defence Secretary Donald Rumsfeld to find a way to  give funds to Pakistan, which the U. S.  needed as a base to attack  Afghanistan and topple the Taliban who had harboured the al Qaeda  plotters. Zakheim said he approached then Jordanian ambassador to Washington  Marwan Muasher and asked if he could tie aid to Pakistan to  legislation appropriating U. S.  funds to Jordan, a much more popular  recipient of U. S.  largesse on Capitol Hill.  Muasher agreed. 'I never would have gotten to first base with Pakistan [without tying  aid to Jordan],' Zakheim said.  Without better cooperation from  Pakistan on terrorism, the U. S.  Congress will decide that the  Pakistanis 'are totally part of the problem and you'll see a real  backlash there. 'Yet if Congress were to cut off aid to Pakistan, the United States  would be repeating a pattern of engagement and abandonment that has  helped make the relationship so dysfunctional.  It would also be  jeopardising its exit strategy from Afghanistan. The U. S.  was Pakistan's major external ally after independence,  providing military support to balance India, long a Soviet ally.  The  U. S.  sided with Pakistan in a 1971 war with India that led to the  loss of East Pakistan, which became the independent nation of  Bangladesh.  The U. S.  cut back aid, however, when it became apparent  that Pakistan was trying to match India and develop nuclear weapons. In the 1980s, the U. S.  reversed course to use Pakistan as a base to  fund jihadists battling the Soviet occupation of Afghanistan.   Sanctions were slapped back on after the Pakistanis followed India  and tested a nuclear weapon in 1998 and then abruptly lifted again  after 9-11. Former Prime Minister Aziz called Pakistan 'the most allied ally and  the most sanctioned ally' of the United States.  Paul Pillar, a former CIA analyst, said that while 'there are plenty  of reasons to be pessimistic about U. S. -Pakistani relations,' it  might be possible to use the bin Laden discovery as leverage to gain  fuller cooperation against remaining al Qaeda leaders in Pakistan -  such as Ayman al-Zawahiri, bin Laden's presumed successor - and  members of the Haqqani group of Afghan militants who have caused  numerous U. S.  casualties in Afghanistan. 'They owe us something,' Pillar said of the Pakistanis. Pillar, a former national intelligence officer for the Middle East  under the Bush administration, speculated that most Pakistani  officials might not have known about bin Laden's whereabouts because  they chose not to know. 'My guess is that various layers of Pakistani officialdom were not  wanting to know and not making efforts to find out,' he said. 