Far from concluding the war on terror, both Western and  Muslim-majority countries - many emerging or still embroiled  in months of popular protests — will continue to face a threat  from extremist ideology after the United States' decade-long  campaign to capture or kill Osama bin Laden has come to an  end, most analysts say. The U. S.  will now position its tactical focus and key intelligence  assets to defeat those members of al Qaida's (AQ) network of global  affiliates who remain elusive.  The hunt for bin Laden was costly, resulting in wars both in  Afghanistan and Iraq, claiming the lives of over 100,000 civilians  and 5,000 U. S.  military personnel, and draining 1. 3 trillion dollars  from state funds since Sep.  11, 2001.  However, as President Barack Obama made clear in his speech on Sunday  night, bin Laden's death, while an important moment for U. S.  morale,  does not herald the end of the U. S.  campaign against extremist  ideology nor does it greatly reduce the potential for more terrorist  attacks, according to analysts. 'He's been a source of ideology and a symbol and those are roles that  can be played by a dead man, as well as a live one… These [attacks]  will happen regardless of bin Laden,' former CIA analyst Dr.  Paul R.   Pillar told IPS. A decentralised networkSince news of the death of al Qaeda's figurehead broke over  Washington Sunday night, there has been almost universal consensus  that it will do little to strange the group's operational capacity,  given its decentralised leadership and diffuse bases of operation. The most recent attempts on U. S.  targets — Umar Farouk  Abdulmutallab's 'underwear' bombing of a Detroit-bound commercial  airliner and Faisal Shazad's car packed with faulty explosives in New  York's Times Square — were attributed to the Yemeni-based al-Qaeda in  the Arabian Peninsula (AQAP), and are highly indicative of this  trend.  'External operations (AQ's attacks against the West) are not likely  to be impacted.  [Bin Laden] really only got involved in ops planning  to approve spectaculars, particularly those using a new means of  attack or against a new target,' Leah Farrall, a former senior  counterterrorism analyst with the Australian Federal Police, wrote on  her blog, 'All Things Counter Terrorism. ''Second-tier leaders deal with external operations for the most part.   Aside from communications disruptions (which do little to disrupt  those already deployed) this section will continue on business as  usual,' Farrall added. While bin Laden's death marks a significant loss for the  organisation's strategic guidance, its ability to coalesce and focus  the energies of disparate extremist groups into terrorising on both a  local and global scale, and in promoting its grotesque model of  inspirational authority, according to some analysts, AQ's  organisational leadership is structured to allow others such as Ayman  al-Zawahiri, AQ's putative but far less capable heir-apparent, or  Anwar al-Awlaki, AQAP's chief of operations to continue attacks,  albeit with less cohesiveness.  As recently as Apr.  30, in a bombing thought to have been perpetrated  by AQIM, 16 Western tourists were killed in Morocco. Along with other organisations that espoused violence as a means to  create an Islamic utopia, using as religious justification various  fundamentalist interpretations such as al-Wahhab and Egyptian born- Sayyid Qtub's, AQ succeeded in exploiting particular world events  beginning in the late 1970s and early 1980s to elicit a violent  response from a few hundred like-minded individuals - burdening, in  the process, an overwhelming majority of Muslims who did not have,  nor wanted to have any association with bin Laden's violent variant  of anti-imperialism. Despite bin Laden's questionable religious authority, he was  extremely adept at melding political sentiments that stood up against  the historical and modern legacies of Western imperialism, the Middle  Eastern autocrats of pan-Arab nationalism - as well as Arab  monarchies, particularly Saudi Arabia, bin Laden's birthplace — with  messages of social justice for all Muslims and a incitement of jihad  against Western targets throughout the world.  Since the U. S. 's failed attempts to kill bin Laden under the Bill  Clinton and George W.  Bush administrations - the 1998 missile attack  on a compound near Khost, Afghanistan and the 2001 firefight in  Afghanistan's Tora Bora region - the Central Intelligence Agency's  Special Activities Division and the U. S.  military's Joint Special  Operations Command as well as other intelligence agencies have, in a  frustrating, at points disappointing campaign, targeted AQ's  leadership with tenacious zeal. President Obama stated in his announcement on Monday night  that bin Laden's death 'should be welcomed by all who believe in  human peace and dignity. ' But his movement is far from being defeated  wholesale.  The pro-democracy uprisings in the Middle East have reiterated what  has long been a formal rejection of the extremist narrative in the  mainstream public opinion of Muslim-majority countries, and they  indicate a further shift away from the latest version of  fundamentalist revivalism — religious identity was but a peripheral  component that motivated the forces for change in both Egypt and  Tunisia.  '[E]ven before bin Laden's death, analysts had begun to argue that  al-Qaida was rapidly becoming irrelevant,' Richard A.  Clarke, former  counterterrorism coordinator at the National Security Council wrote  in a New York Times op- ed on Tuesday. 'But such rejoicing would be premature.  To many Islamist ideologues,  the Arab Spring simply represents the removal of obstacles that stood  in the way of establishing the caliphate.  Their goal has not changed,  nor has their willingness to use terrorism,' Clarke added.  Regardless of any continued threat AQ and its affiliates may pose,  most would agree that Osama's death will encourage the West, if only  symbolically, to move away from its preoccupation with radical Islam  and focus on the real concerns and aspirations in those countries  where its existence has had the most devastating impact.  'It is time to declare extreme Islamism a failed ideology, renounce  the culture of fear, and get on with the new world of Middle East  politics,' Dr.  Gary Sick, a regional expert wrote in his blog 'Gary's Choices' on Tuesday.  