A week after U. N.  Security Council Resolution 1973 sanctioned  air strikes against the regime of Colonel Muammar el-Gaddafi  in Libya, U. S.  President Barack Obama made clear that it would  not be U. S.  planes maintaining the No-Fly Zone (NFZ).  Rather,  the effort to safeguard Libyan civilians would be led  primarily by the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO). As the assault on Gaddafi's forces enters its 47th day, European and  U. S.  defence experts alike have discerned two realities. First, that the U. S.  has no intention of stepping up its role in the  so-called humanitarian war — the first of its kind under Obama's  tenure — despite increasingly harsh ground conditions for the  'ragtag' rebels in Misurata, Bengazi, Tripoli and Ajdabiya. And second, that European military prowess has withered in the last  two decades, resulting in a NATO that, without U. S.  buttressing, is  unlikely to see the kind of success the Libyan opposition hoped for. Addressing the Financial Times after repeated calls from allies for  increased support from Washington, Vice President Joe Biden said last  week, 'If the Lord Almighty extricated the U. S.  from NATO… it is  bizarre to suggest that the rest of the world lacks the capacity to  deal with Libya — it does not. 'Speaking to the German news agency Deutsche Presse-Agentur under  condition of anonymity last week, a top European diplomat said  jokingly and in sharp contrast to Biden's words, 'European defence  policy died in Libya - we just have to pick a sand dune under which  we can bury it. 'However, the perseverance of Gaddafi's forces against an assault by  the historically insurmountable alliance suggests that, absent a  steady flow from the U. S.  armory, not only European defence policy  but also NATO itself could sing its swan song in the North African  country. U. S.  Bows out of 'Operation Unified Protector'Briefing the press in Naples, Italy  Tuesday, NATO Spokesperson Oana Lungescu expressed satisfaction  with what was initially predicted to be a 90-day offensive, claiming  that 17 ammunition stores, along with several armoured personnel  carriers and other vehicles being used by forces loyal to Gaddafi,  were successfully destroyed in the last week alone. Vice Admiral Rinaldo Veri, commander of Maritime Forces for the  mission, added that the maritime embargo was contributing  significantly to the protection of civilians and claimed 'All NATO  targets are military in nature and have been clearly linked to the  Qadhafi regime's systematic attacks on the Libyan population and  populated areas. 'However, the events of the last month suggest that 'Operation Unified  Protector' is crumbling from a lack of unity. As far back as early April, Brigadier General Mark van Uhm, NATO's  Dutch chief of allied operations, told reporters that the mission  suffered from a lack of aircraft, such as the A-10 Thunderbolt slow- flying warplanes and AC-130 Spectre gunships that Obama withdrew  shortly after the offensive began. Pilots of France's fighter-bombers have praised the precision of the  air-to-ground missile strikes but lamented the lack of the U. S. 's  specialised close-support planes, the only modules able to  differentiate between a 'rebel Toyota pick-up and a loyalist Toyota  pick-up'. Harkening back to the Powell  Doctrine adopted during the Gulf War of the early 1990s, which  committed the U. S.  to the use of extreme force in the event of  intervention, Richard Haass, president of the Council  on Foreign Relations, said last week, 'We either have to do a lot  more… or go for a cease-fire and live with the fact that Gaddafi  might be in place for some time. 'Almost a month ago, the New York Times reported that defence experts  in Washington recognised Obama's plight in the face of a 'vexing  choice' between watching a lengthy civil war unfold in Libya at a  terrible human cost and rushing headlong into its third war in a  Muslim-majority country. Referring to Obama's decision to severely limit the use of U. S.  war  technology such as Tomahawk cruise missiles from U. S.  submarines,  Robert Hunter, former U. S.  ambassador to NATO and currently a senior  advisor at the RAND Corporation, said in an interview with the Council on  Foreign Relations in early April, 'This can be a serious blow to  NATO. ''I'm afraid that the decision to remove the A-10s and the AC-30s —  particularly if it means that Gaddafi prevails even in one part of  the country — is going to be read by Europe as the U. S.  not pulling  its weight. ''This is something I never thought as a former ambassador that I  would live to see happen,' Hunter added. Meanwhile, the rebels in Libya are feeling the heat of NATO's  deterioration. General Abdel Fatah Younis, head of the rebel army, expressed deep  frustration with the sporadic intervention, saying on Apr.  5,  'Misurata is being subjected to a full extermination.  NATO blesses us  every now and then with a bombardment here and there [but is  otherwise] letting [our] people die every day — NATO has disappointed  us. '