The International Criminal Court (ICC) appears poised to issue  arrest warrants for three yet unnamed high-level members of  the Libyan government for committing alleged crimes against  humanity during the past two months of political turmoil that  has taken thousands of lives. 'I don't care about political colours,' Luis Moreno-Ocampo, the  Hague, Netherlands-based ICC prosecutor, told IPS after a press  conference here, in response to a question about whether or not he  would also consider investigating Libya's opposition figures. On Wednesday, Ocampo briefed the 15-member U. N.  Security Council.  His  report indicated that the alleged war crimes committed 'include the  use of imprecise weaponry such as cluster munitions, multiple rocket  launchers and mortars and other forms of heavy weaponry, in crowded  urban areas, in particular Misurata'. 'The evidence shows that events in neighbouring Egypt and Tunisia  prompted Libyan security forces to begin preparations for the  possibility of demonstrations in Libya.  As early as January,  mercenaries were being hired and brought into Libya,' Ocampo told the  Council. He did not elaborate on where the so-called 'mercenaries' came from,  although they have been widely reported to be African. In his briefing to the Council, Ocampo acknowledged that U. N. - authorised military action by NATO to enforce a no-fly zone also 'led  to civilian casualties in Libya', and added that the ongoing violence  in that country could 'only be halted through an immediate ceasefire  and political settlement'. Ocampo said he was looking into the U. N.  inquiry commission report on  the alleged crimes against humanity that is expected to be completed  by the end of this month before he asks judges in The Hague to issue  arrest warrants. A U. N.  Security Council resolution empowers the ICC prosecutor to  investigate and prosecute those in Libya responsible for committing  crimes that under the rules of the ICC could be perceived as war  crimes. The ICC prosecutor did not say whether he would ask the court for an  arrest warrant for Libyan leader Muammar Gaddafi, who has been asking  NATO forces for the past few days to engage in a dialogue to resolve  Libya's political crisis. Media reports suggest that neither Washington nor its European allies  are in the mood to heed that call.  'The specter of ICC prosecution is serious and imminent and should  again warn those around Gaddafi about the perils of continuing to tie  their fate to his,' Susan Rice, the U. S.  ambassador to the U. N. , told  the Security Council Wednesday. The United States has yet to endorse the treaty that created the  International Criminal Court.  China, also a permanent member of the U. N.  Security Council, holds a  different position on the question of the Libyan situation. '[We are] not in favour of any arbitrary interpretation of Security  Council's resolutions nor any actions that go beyond the Council's  mandate concerning Libya,' said Li Baodong, the Chinese permanent  representative to the U. N. , after Ocampo's briefing.  'We hope that  the ICC will fully consider the need of properly solving the Libyan  crisis when implementing Resolution 1970. 'The Chinese diplomat said the international community should 'respect  the sovereignty, independence, unity and territorial integrity of  Libya' and added that 'the internal affairs and the future of Libya  should be left to Libyan people. 'Like the United States and Russia, among the five permanent members  of the 15-member Security Council, China has not endorsed the  endorsed the U. N.  treaty establishing the ICC. In response to a question from IPS about the ICC role in Libya,  Richard Dicker of Human Rights Watch said the investigation into  human rights violations and war crimes in Libya should not merely be  focused on the government but the opposition as well. 'The ICC should be investigating alleged crimes committed by all  parties,' he told IPS. Others are more sceptical of the prosecution campaign. Michael Ratner, president of the New York-based Center for  Constitutional Rights, recently told IPS it was obvious the killings  of civilians in Libya constitute 'war crimes'.  Killing protestors may well be a crime against humanity and subject  to ICC jurisdiction upon a referral by the U. N.  Security Council, he  pointed out.  'It is appalling.  Unfortunately, the Security Council and  particularly the United States have little credibility to focus their  wrath on Libya,' said Ratner.  The Security Council, in large part, has lost its credibility because  of the U. S.  refusal to make such a referral when the Israelis  slaughtered Palestinians in Gaza, he added.  'Why Libya now and not Israel in 2009?' asked Ratner.  