In Hollywood Westerns, the sheriff engages in a shootout with  bad guys and wins.  Such was the story of Wyatt Earp, who  killed rustlers in the 'Gunfight at OK Corral'.  Then there is  the American cowboy, represented by John Wayne - tall,  handsome, Anglo-Saxon — who rides into town whistling before  he dispatches the 'bad guys' sometimes represented by  'Indians' like Geronimo, the Apache, who supposedly terrorised  innocent settlers. Into that tradition, late on the night of May 1, stepped President  Barack Obama, with a tale of a 40-minute gun battle that he  personally monitored from the White House (complete with a photo of  his national security team at work), to take out the world's most  dangerous terrorist who used his own wife as a human shield.  The bad  guy was hiding out in a fortified million-dollar mansion in  Abbottabad, Pakistan, where the 'good guys' had no choice but to kill  him. 'Justice has been done,' said Obama in his midnight address.  His  lurid tale of a team of new American heroes was backed up by his  team. 'He (Osama) was engaged in a firefight with those that entered the  area of the house he was in,' said John Brennan, White House security  adviser.  'It was a firefight.  He, therefore, was killed in that  firefight. 'In reality, historians are still debating whether Wyatt Earp was a  heroic lawman or settling a personal feud in the town of Tombstone,  Arizona.  Many cowboys were either poor blacks or Mexican, not  daredevil fighters.  And Geronimo came from a long tribal history of  defending his people against Spanish settlers, Mexican and U. S.   soldiers who were stealing the land of the Chiricahua Apache.  Like the story of Wyatt Earp, John Wayne and Geronimo, the facts  behind Sunday's gunfight at Abbottabad are dubious at best or simply  untrue.  What makes matters worse is that numerous laws and human  rights rules were broken.  Finally, the operation to kill Osama bin  Laden shows a complete failure in the fabled intelligence apparatus  in the U. S. Jay Carney, the president's spokesman, told reporters on Tuesday, 'We  provided a great deal of information with great haste in order to  inform you . . .  and obviously some of the information came in piece by  piece and is being reviewed and updated and elaborated on. 'The house that Osama bin Laden lived in was downgraded from a  million-dollar mansion to a value of 250,000 dollars after inquiries  by reporters from local property dealers.  The latest property  records, unearthed by the Associated Press news agency, show that the  land was actually bought for just 48,000 dollars. The White House has backtracked on the gun battle, stating that only  one of Bin Laden's men fired a gun from an adjoining house.  The  'wife' who was used as a 'human shield' turned out to be neither Bin  Laden's wife nor a human shield, nor did she die.  The famous photograph of Obama watching the raid live in the White  House turns out to be suspect also since the video transmission of  the raid failed.  CIA director Leon Panetta told PBS television, 'Once  those teams went into the compound, I can tell you that there was a  time period of almost 20 or 25 minutes that we really didn't know  just exactly what was going on. 'While the story has unraveled, serious questions are starting to be  raised about the legal nature of the killing. Amnesty International senior director Claudio Cordone said in a  statement, 'Given that bin Laden was not armed, it is not clear how  he resisted arrest and whether an attempt was made to capture him  rather than kill him. 'Navi Pillay, the U. N.  High Commissioner for Human Rights called for a  'full disclosure of the accurate facts' on the operation.  'The United  Nations condemns terrorism but it also has basic rules of how  counter-terrorism activity has to be carried out.  It has to be in  compliance with international law. 'Even religious leaders have weighed in.  Dr Rowan Williams, the head  of the Anglican church, told the Telegraph newspaper in Britain: 'The  killing of an unarmed man is always going to leave a very  uncomfortable feeling because it does not look as if justice is seen  to be done. 'Some have condemned Obama outright.  Geoffrey Robertson, a human  rights lawyer in Britain, told the BBC that Obama's claim that  justice was done 'is a total misuse of language'. 'This is the justice of the Red Queen: sentence first, trial later,'  he said, in a reference to 'Alice in Wonderland'. Yet perhaps the biggest question of all is why it took U. S.   intelligence almost 10 years to track down their quarry when he was  apparently living under their noses for roughly half of that, in a  compound next to a premier Pakistani military academy with no  security other than a couple of guns. Either the Pakistanis fooled the U. S.  military, or neither the CIA  nor Pakistan's Inter Services Intelligence agency had any idea,  suggesting that the 54-year-old man on dialysis outwitted them. The answer to the question, unfortunately, lies deep under the  Arabian Sea where the U. S.  dumped the body of Bin Laden, since the  U. S.  claims to have killed what could have been their biggest  information source in a decade. There are several survivors who could help shed light.  But not one of  them is in U. S.  hands.  Amal Ahmed Abdulfattah, the youngest of bin  Laden's three wives, has already told Pakistani interrogators details  of Bin Laden's final years. No matter.  CIA officials are already spinning new tales for the U. S.   media, based on documents and data they claim to have captured.  'He  (Osama) wasn't just a figurehead,' one U. S.  official told The New  York Times on condition of anonymity.  'He continued to plot and plan,  to come up with ideas about targets and to communicate those ideas to  other senior Qaeda leaders. 'Like the story of the fish that got away, there is no proof of any of  the new allegations.  But like Wyatt Earp, the story of the gunfight  at Abbotabad is sure to be coming to a movie theatre near you. *Pratap Chatterjee is a visiting fellow at the Center for American  Progress in Washington DC specialising in fraud, waste and abuse in  government procurement. 