Five days after U. S.  Navy Seals shot and killed Osama bin  Laden at his secret compound in Abbottabad, Pakistan, U. S.   President Barack Obama is enjoying a significant boost in  public approval, as well as a transformation in his public  image. The question on most people's minds is what he will do with the new  political capital he has gained. On this, he is being given a great deal of gratuitous advice — from  accelerating the timetable for the U. S.  withdrawal in Afghanistan  that is scheduled to begin Jul.  1, to pushing his own peace plan on  Israel and the Palestinians, to pressing Republicans much harder on  the necessity for tax increases to reduce the yawning budget deficit. 'The end of bin Laden has given Obama a rare chance for a new  beginning,' according to Leslie Gelb, president emeritus of the  Council on Foreign Relations (CFR).  'It gives him the power to get  hard things done. ''Just as 9/11 transformed an unpopular and divisive President George  W.  Bush and empowered him enormously, so 5/1 hands President Obama  the rarest of chances to lead,' Gelb wrote on the Daily Beast  website.  Polls taken since the operation have shown increases in his public- approval ratings to around 50 percent — a strong reversal of a trend  that had slowly dragged his poll percentages down to the mid-to-low  40s. The well-respected Gallup organisation, which Thursday released a  three-day-tracking poll, found a six-percent increase in the  president's public-approval rating during the three days after the  raid in what it called Obama's first 'rally event' — a positive  reaction to a major international or domestic crisis.  While that was extremely modest compared to the all-time record 35- percent increase George W.  Bush received in his ratings after the  9/11 terrorist attacks on New York and the Pentagon, the consensus  among even right-wing commentators is that Obama has emerged as a  more-formidable political force primarily because he has demolished,  at one blow, the increasingly widely accepted notion that he is a  cautious, even timid, politician who instinctively favours the safest  political option and who sees his foreign-policy role as managing the  inevitable decline of U. S.  power in the world. 'It is this last claim that took such a profound blow when Obama  approved the operation against bin Laden and chose the riskiest  option involving a face-to-face confrontation with American commandos  — on the orders of the president of the United States,' wrote E. J.   Dionne, Jr. , a political columnist at the Washington Post, this week.  A drone strike or bombing the compound from the air would not have  put U. S.  personnel at risk or so deeply embarrassed, not to say  humiliated, Pakistan's military whose cooperation is still regarded  as essential in prosecuting the broader war against the Taliban and  its allies. Both would have been much safer options, particularly given the  terrible memories of the 'Desert One' operation almost exactly 31  years ago when President Jimmy Carter's attempt to rescue U. S.   hostages in Tehran ended in disaster when a transport plane and a  helicopter collided at a staging area outside the capital, aborting  the mission.  Many political pros believe the debacle contributed importantly to  Carter's loss to Ronald Reagan in his re-election bid seven months  later. Not a few analysts this week noted the obvious irony that Obama's  'rally event' was made possible by an operation that no doubt would  have appealed most to his predecessor, George W.  Bush. 'The Democrat who was elected as the anti-Bush has seen his  popularity and perceptions of his competence soar for serving as the  decisive, 'war on terror' commander-in-chief who oversaw a 'High  Noon' like showdown between good and evil,' wrote David Rothkopf, a  national-security expert who blogs on foreignpolicy. com. 'The thoughtful, lawyerly, multilateralist did what had to be done,  acting unilaterally, violating another nation's sovereignty, keeping  an ally in the dark to preserve security, and gunning down a man  without benefit of trial,' he noted. Indeed, right-wing hawks claimed hopefully that the operation marked  further confirmation that, despite his campaign promises to reverse  Bush policies in a host of areas, Obama has been forced to embrace  his predecessor's 'global-war-against-terror' paradigm.  'The most striking fact of Mr.  Obama's prosecution of the war on  terror is how much it resembles Mr.  Bush's, to the consternation of  America's anti-antiterror left,' enthused the Wall Street Journal's  neo-conservative editorial writers who went on to warn against any  talk of negotiations with the Taliban or accelerated withdrawal from  Afghanistan. But, as noted by James Traub, also writing on foreignpolicy. com,   Obama had pledged when he first launched his presidential campaign  almost four years ago that he would not hesitate to strike  unilaterally against 'high-value terrorist targets' in Pakistan and  that any changes - such as closing Guantanamo, ending renditions, and  relying more on multilateral institutions -- he would make to  Washington's counter-terrorist strategy would be designed above all  to increase its effectiveness in protecting national security. It was Obama, after all, who said at the outset that he didn't oppose  war, only 'a dumb war' as Bush was waging in Iraq at the time. 'The great despair of Obama's foreign policy advisors in 2007 was how  relentlessly he was pegged as the 'soft' candidate,' Traub, who is  close to senior administration officials, wrote this week.  'The raid on bin Laden's lair has accomplished something beyond the  disposing of Public Enemy No.  1: It has freed Obama from having to  prove his toughness,' he wrote.  'He can advocate 'soft' policies  without being seen as soft.  Having broken the rules with such éclat,  he can now safely argue for the rules he believes in. 'Rothkopf agreed that the raid could mark a strategic 'pivot point'  for Obama.  '(O)n the foreign policy front, Obama's most-Bush-like  moment may be his last such moment …unless the moment and its  headiness changes him as a president more than he or his allies might  currently anticipate,' he wrote. '(T)his moment signals not just the death of bin Laden, but the death  of American nation-building, counter-insurgency and wholesale  investment in the forced transformation of the Middle East,' Rothkopf  predicted. '(W)e will view it as the beginning of an Obama-era shaped by an  Obama will feel much freer to be his own man and who will make  policies much less defensively.  After all, who among his opponents  will be able to call him diffident or uncomfortable with security  concerns ever again?'*Jim Lobe's blog on U. S.  foreign policy can be read at  http://www. lobelog. com. 