Barack Obama and top administration officials have taken  advantage of the killing of Osama bin Laden to establish a new  narrative suggesting the event will pave the way for  negotiations with the Taliban for peace in Afghanistan. That good news message, reported by Washington Post senior editor  Rajiv Chandrasekaran Tuesday, suggested that the administration would  now be able to negotiate a deal that would make it possible for the  United States to withdraw its troops from Afghanistan.  The Chandrasekaran article quoted a 'senior administration official'  as saying that bin Laden's death at the hands of U. S.  forces  'presents an opportunity for reconciliation that didn't exist  before'.  The official suggested that administration officials were  seeking to 'leverage the death into a spark that ignites peace  talks'. The claim of new prospects for peace conveyed to Chandrasekaran  appears to be dependent mainly on the assumption that the Taliban  leaders in Pakistan will now fear that they will be captured or  killed by the U. S.  forces, as was bin Laden.  An official familiar with administration policy discussions on  Afghanistan said the fact that the United States could locate and  kill bin Laden 'so deep inside Pakistan' is presumed to 'have an  impact on the Taliban's thinking'. The idea that U. S.  policy is now on the road to an 'endgame' in  Afghanistan glosses over a central problem: the publicly expressed  U. S.  determination to keep a U. S.  combat presence in Afghanistan  indefinitely is not an acceptable condition to the Taliban as a basis  for negotiations. The Chandrasekaran report anticipated the announcement soon of a  'strategic partnership agreement' between the United States and the  government of President Hamid Karzai as 'another potential catalyst  for talks'.  But that agreement is likely to reduce the Taliban willingness to  open negotiations with the United States rather than increase it,  because it is expected to include a provision for a long-term U. S.   military presence to conduct 'counterterrorism operations' as well as  training.  None of the Taliban officials interviewed by Pakistani officials on  behalf of the United States last year said that there could be a  peace agreement in which U. S.  troops would be allowed to stay in  Afghanistan.  'There is no doubt that the number one aim of the Taliban in  negotiations would be getting the U. S.  States military to leave,'  said Michael Wahid Hanna, a programme officer at the Century  Foundation, who attended meetings held by a task force sponsored by  the foundation with a wide range of Taliban and former Taliban  officials in Afghanistan and Pakistan.  Hanna said the signing of an agreement for a long-term U. S.  military  presence in Afghanistan 'would not be a helpful step' for starting  peace negotiations.  The new narrative portrays the Obama administration as sharply  divided between military and Pentagon leaders who want to maximise  the number of troops in Afghanistan for as long as possible and some  civilian advisers who want a much bigger and faster drawdown.  But that description of the policy debate on Afghanistan, which is  accurate as far as it goes, fails to make clear that the civilians in  question - including Obama himself - are not aiming at withdrawing  all U. S.  forces from Afghanistan, even if there is a negotiated  agreement with the Taliban.  In an interview with 60 Minutes airing Sunday night, Obama says the  bin Laden killing 'reconfirms that we can focus on Al-Qaeda, focus on  the threats to our homeland, train Afghans in a way that allows them  to stabilise their country.  But we don't need to have a perpetual  footprint of the size we have now. 'Obama's statement hints at his intention to continue to maintain a  much smaller military 'footprint' in Afghanistan for many years to  come.  The Chandrasekaran report suggested that that the real obstacle to  beginning talks has been the unwillingness of the Taliban to renounce  its ties with Al-Qaeda.  But there is no need for more pressure on the Taliban on the issue of  its ties with Al-Qaeda, according to observers who have met with  Taliban officials.  Well before bin Laden's assassination, some senior Taliban officials  with ties to the Quetta Shura made statements to the Century  Foundation Task Force that appeared to be open to such a commitment.   'They said this can happen — something to that effect — as part of an  agreement,' recalled Jeffrey Laurenti, director of foreign policy  programmes for the Century Foundation, who accompanied task force  members in those meetings.  In early December 2009, the 'Islamic Emirate of Afghanistan' - the  official name by which the Taliban identifies itself - sent out a  statement to press organisations declaring it had 'no agenda of  meddling in the internal affairs of other countries and is ready to  give legal guarantees if foreign forces are withdrawn from  Afghanistan. 'Although it did not explicitly mention Al-Qaeda in the statement, it  was clearly a response to the Obama administration pointing to  Taliban ties with Al-Qaeda as central to the rationale for the U. S. - NATO war. But the Taliban are not expected to make a declaration explicitly  naming Al-Qaeda in advance of an agreement, much less before  negotiations begin.  'It makes no sense for the Taliban to concede  this point on the front end - without receiving any commensurate  concession from the other side,' the Century Foundation's Hanna told  Associated Press this week.  'They portray any pre-emptive severing of ties as a type of  unilateral partial disarmament,' he added.  The new narrative also suggests that the killing of bin Laden may now  reduce another obstacle to peace negotiations — Pakistani policy.   U. S.  officials were said to believe that Pakistani officials had  'interfered with peace efforts in the past', but now that Pakistan is  under fire for possible complicity in bin Laden's living near the  capital for years, 'have an opportunity to play a more constructive  role'. Pakistani policy has opposed peace negotiations between the Taliban  and the Afghan regime behind Pakistan's back.  But contrary to the new  narrative, Pakistan has been more eager to begin peace negotiations  than the United States.  Pakistan has long complained that it was not being informed about  U. S.  negotiating aims and strategy — especially with whom the United  States is willing to talk and whether it hopes to impose stiff  demands on the Taliban through military force.  Speaking at the New  America Foundation Apr.  22, Pakistani Foreign Minister Salman Bashir  hinted strongly that his government disagrees with the U. S.  strategy  of hoping that military pressure will yield a better settlement. 'In Islamabad we have our own assessment of the situation in  Afghanistan,' said the foreign minister.  'The U. S.  says the momentum  of the Taliban has been halted, but is fragile and reversible.  Our  own assessment is that the security situation has continued to  deteriorate. ' The new Obama administration narrative seems to suggest that Pakistan  will now display a less sceptical attitude toward the U. S.  diplomatic  strategy and urge the Taliban to negotiate despite the signals of  U. S.  determination to keep a long-term military presence in  Afghanistan. *Gareth Porter is an investigative historian and journalist  specialising in U. S.  national security policy.  The paperback edition  of his latest book, 'Perils of Dominance: Imbalance of Power and the  Road to War in Vietnam', was published in 2006. 