Amid high-level U. S.  congressional delegations to evaluate  developments in Iraq, a growing number of voices here, from  both the Barack Obama administration and members of Congress,  are concerned about a complete withdrawal of U. S.  forces from  the country by December 2011 — a deadline set forth in the  supposedly inviolable Status of Forces Agreement (SOFA)  between the U. S.  and Iraqi governments back in 2008. The U. S.  raid that killed Al-Qaeda leader Osama bin Laden has  reinvigorated debate about the necessity of a large U. S.  military  presence in the region, particularly in Afghanistan, but after  Speaker of the U. S.  House of Representatives John Boehner's visit to  Iraq earlier this month, the argument for keeping troops in Iraq past  the deadline has gained momentum. 'I think a small residual force should remain and the sooner the  administration engages the Iraqi government, I think the better off  we are going to be,' Boehner said during his trip.  Regardless of the number of U. S.  soldiers stationed in Iraq after  December, the Department of Defence's current plans for departure  will leave behind legions of U. S.  diplomatic personnel — the U. S.   Department of State intends to double its staff in Iraq to nearly  16,000 and rely entirely on private contractors for security.  Along with senior members of Congress, top military commanders have  indicated that the U. S.  would be more than willing to keep a  sufficiently large number of troops in Iraq past the deadline to  maintain security and continue their advisory role, contingent only  on a formal request by the Iraqi government.  Some initial estimates  by the U. S.  military would keep up to 10,000 residual troops  stationed in Iraq.  'Should the Iraqi government decide to discuss the potential for some  U. S.  troops to stay, I am certain my government will welcome that  dialogue,' the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Admiral Mike  Mullen said during a visit to Camp Victory in Baghdad last month.  Since combat operations ended in September 2010, the remaining 46,000  U. S.  troops have been limited to an advisory role in training and  assisting Iraq's military and security forces.  But some analysts who  favour a continued presence of U. S.  troops have focused on the U. S.   military's ability to protect strategic interests, rather than  strengthening Iraq's self-governance and building a more favourable  relationship with all levels of Iraqi society.  'Having active bases in Iraq would allow us to project power and  influence, counter the threat from both Iran and Al-Qaeda, and  possibly even nudge the entire Middle East in a more pro-Western  direction,' Max Boot, a senior fellow at the Council on Foreign  Relations, wrote in a Wall Street Journal op-ed last month.  While the Obama administration has framed the issue in decidedly  different terms - placing Iraq's self-determination as the major  consideration in any plan to extend the SOFA - senior officials have  been quick to point out the mutual interests a residual force may  ensure and have stated that any decision to keep troops stationed in  Iraq must, because of logistical purposes, be made within a  reasonable timeframe.  'They will not be able to do the kind of job in intelligence fusion.   They won't be able to protect their own airspace.  They will have  problems with logistics and maintenance,' Gates said in testimony to  the House Armed Services Committee earlier this year.  But some analysts have criticised the focus on troop numbers, arguing  that government officials, particularly members of Congress, should  be more concerned with bolstering the diplomatic mission in Iraq, and  how major cuts to the Department of State's budget requests — 8. 4  billion dollars for fiscal year 2011 — will affect that mission.  'The civilian side of the U. S.  foreign policy machine has never been  more important across the entire Middle East: understanding and  engaging newly empowered publics, building connections with emergent  civil society movements, partnering on economic development projects,  supporting police training and rule of law development,' Dr.  Marc  Lynch, a regional expert, wrote on his foreignpolicy. com blog.  'That requires thinking past the military mission and devoting  adequate resources to the civilian sector - something which Secretary  Gates and the U. S.  military clearly understand, but which Congress  still seemingly does not,' Lynch added.  Iraqi politicsWhile some continue to emphasise the need for either more troops or a  renewed effort at U. S.  public diplomacy in Iraq as the deadline draws  nearer, Iraq will continue to face significant challenges in its  domestic political arena.  Iraq has not been immune to the sentiments of pro-democracy uprisings  gripping the Middle East — most of the protests, some ending in  violent clashes with government security forces, have taken place in  Iraq's semi-autonomous Kurdish region in the north, including the  cities of Mosul, Kirkuk and Sulaimaniya.  'The Iraqi political authorities need to end their knee-jerk  responses and stop banning protests, detaining demonstrators, and  beating journalists,' Joe Stork, the deputy director on the Middle  East for Human Rights Watch, said in a recent statement.  Last month, tensions flared at one intersection of Kirkuk's Arab and  Kurdish neighbourhoods and, while not violent, resulted in the  deployment of U. S.  soldiers to ease the confrontation.  Acrimonious for decades, relations between Iraq's Arab-governed  majority and its Kurdish minority have deteriorated in recent years  as territorial and sovereignty disputes, including over the oil-rich  city of Kirkuk, continue to fester.  The overall levels of violence in Iraq have dropped dramatically  since 2007, but the targeted killing of government officials,  sectarian strife — both in parliament and in the streets — and  corruption continue to hinder what is likely Iraq's most important  undertaking: rebuilding after years of a bloody invasion, occupation  and civil war.  Any extension of the SOFA is all but a political impossibility in  Iraq since, even though Iraqi government officials, including Prime  Minister Nuri al-Maliki, have indicated their desire to keep some  troops past the deadline, the response from their constituencies, and  from leaders such as Moqtada al-Sadr, strongly opposed to any  prolonged presence, would be disastrous for Iraq's fragile  parliamentary coalition. The crucial questions with regards to the U. S.  presence in Iraq may  yet come to be guided from a diplomatic, civil society rather than a  militaristic frame of reference as President Obama fulfills his  campaign promise to leave Iraq.  