The International Criminal Court's chief prosecutor has asked  a three-judge panel to issue arrest warrants for Libyan leader  Muammar Gaddafi, his second-eldest son, Saif al-Islam, and his  intelligence chief, Abdullah Senussi. Luis Moreno-Ocampo described the evidence against the three men as  'very strong' in a press conference on Monday and said he believed  Libyans eventually would turn them over to the court. The filing against Gaddafi comes just three months into the uprising  against his 41-year rule, which evolved from peaceful protests in  major cities to an armed rebellion based out of the east.  Gaddafi's  regime has brutally attempted to suppress the opposition movement by  shelling rebellious cities, and imprisoning and torturing those who  speak out. Ocampo was due to present a 74-page dossier of evidence to the court  in The Hague, the Netherlands, on Monday.  The judges will decide  whether to reject the petition, ask for more evidence or confirm  crimes against humanity charges and issue international arrest  warrants. 'The evidence shows Muammar Gaddafi personally ordered attacks on  unarmed civilians,' Ocampo said at the press conference.  '[He]  committed the crimes with the goal of preserving his authority, his  absolute authority. 'Gaddafi, Saif al-Islam and Abdullah Senussi held meetings to plan the  crackdown, Ocampo said.  Security forces loyal to the government then  attacked civilians in their homes, used heavy weaponry on funeral  processions, and set up snipers to shoot at people as they left  prayers at mosques, he said. Activists were imprisoned, held incommunicado and tortured, he said. 'International justice'Ocampo described Saif al-Islam as Gaddafi's 'de facto prime minister'  and Senussi as his 'right-hand man' and 'executioner'. 'The office gathered direct evidence about orders issued by Muammar  Gaddafi himself, direct evidence of Saif al-Islam organising the  recruitment of mercenaries, and direct evidence of the participation  of Senussi in the attacks against demonstrators,' Ocampo said. The prosecution's investigation into potential human rights  violations has spanned several countries and involved around 1,500  documents, Al Jazeera's Rory Challands said. But the two-and-a-half months it has taken to come up with a petition  for arrest warrants is a 'heartbeat in international justice', he  added. Ocampo said he was able to finish his investigation quickly because  the Gaddafi regime had committed its crimes in only a few cities,  including Tripoli and Benghazi, and because the crimes had been  committed in a short time. Investigators received numerous phone calls from sources inside Libya  but took no official testimony, since it would have put them at risk,  Ocampo said. 'Gaddafi ruled Libya through fear, and Libyans are losing their fear  now,' he said. Pursuing ICC suspectsDespite NATO bombing operations intended to protect civilians, Libya  has been plunged into civil war, seriously complicating efforts to  arrest ICC suspects. In addition, the ICC has no police force and must rely on states to  enforce any arrests - a strategy which has failed to produce results  in the case of Omar al-Bashir, the Sudanese president, who is wanted  for genocide in Darfur. Libya is not a member of the ICC, but Ocampo said Libyan authorities  had primary responsibility to make arrests and that he expected  Libyans to hand over the three men on their own. Richard Dicker, at New York-based Human Rights Watch, said the  request for arrest warrants 'is a warning bell to others in Libya  that serious crimes there will be punished'. Prosecutors are also investigating allegations of mass rapes, war  crimes committed by different parties and attacks against sub-Saharan  Africans wrongly seen as mercenaries once the Libyan situation  developed into an armed conflict. Initially, prosecutors will rely on a report from the U. N.  Commission  of Inquiry set up by the Human Rights Council, which itself is due to  report on the situation on Jun.  7. *Published under an agreement with Al-Jazeera. 