As the War Powers Act, which purportedly authorised U. S.   President Barack Obama to wage war in Libya for 60 days  without Congressional approval, expires Friday, experts here  continue to question the strategic focus of the NATO-led  operation, with pressure mounting from Capitol Hill on the  Obama administration to lay out what its desired end game in  Libya will be. '[I]n Libya, we saw the prospect of imminent massacre, we had a  mandate for action, and heard the Libyan people's call for help.  Had  we not acted along with our NATO allies and regional coalition  partners, thousands would have been killed,' Obama said, summarising  his rationale for the use of force in a speech about the region  Thursday. 'Now, time is working against Gaddafi.  He does not have control over  his country.  The opposition has organised a legitimate and credible  Interim Council.  And when Gaddafi inevitably leaves or is forced from  power, decades of provocation will come to an end, and the transition  to a democratic Libya can proceed,' Obama added.  Increasingly, voices from both Democratic and Republican parties have  raised concerns about the strategy of U. S.  involvement.  Some have  even called into question the constitutionality of such involvement. Congressman Dennis Kucinich plans to introduce a bill next week in  the U. S.  House of Representatives to vote on the use of force in  Libya.  'President Obama violated the Constitution by pursuing war against  Libya without a Constitutionally-required authorisation for the use  of military force or declaration of war from Congress,' Kucinich said  in a statement Thursday. Similarly, a ranking member of the Senate Foreign Relations  Committee, Senator Richard Lugar, raised a number of issues for the  Obama administration in a statement last week. 'Extended engagements in military action abroad, and the costs and  risks they entail, must be undertaken only with the full support of  the American people,' Sen.  Lugar's statement read.  'If the  Administration seeks to continue our military involvement in Libya,  it is incumbent that they seek and secure Congressional  authorization. 'According to the United Nations, two million civilians have been  adversely affected by the ongoing conflict in Libya, and with as many  as 800,000 refugees fleeing to neighbouring countries, U. N.  officials  asked for an additional 233 million dollars on Wednesday to cope with  the growing humanitarian crisis there. Having already surpassed the 750 million dollar mark - the projected  total costs of U. S.  involvement in Libya before the NATO operation  began — officials at the U. S.  Department of Defence now estimate that  continued enforcement of the no-fly zone could drain upwards of 40  million dollars per month from U. S.  government coffers.  But as Congressional debates over the president's authority to  conduct the war ensue, some experts have criticised the decision to  intervene in Libya in a broader context: whether or not the policy  decisions that have led to the no-fly zone were based on a thorough  consideration of its strategic goals, and the nature of Western  involvement in Libya if a ceasefire could be agreed on or if Gaddafi  were to step down. 'As with the invasion of Iraq, in short, the issue [in Libya] wasn't  whether the West could eventually accomplish 'regime change' if it  tried.  Rather, the key questions revolved around whether it was in  our overall interest to do so and whether the benefits would be worth  the costs,' Stephen Walt wrote on his foreignpolicy. com blog last  week. Some analysts argue that discussion of prolonging U. S.  involvement in  enforcement of the no-fly zone implies that the removal of Gaddafi is  the primary goal.  'There was always from the beginning some confusion about what the  goal was…but it clearly has become one of regime change,' Paul  Pillar, former Central Intelligence Agency analyst, said during a  Middle East Institute conference on Thursday. James L.  Jones, Obama's former national security advisor, echoed  Pillar's assessment in a speech at the National Press Club on Monday. 'Strategically for the U. S. , Libya is not on par with Egypt in terms  of vital interests, but how this crisis is resolved and when it is  resolved is of great importance to us, to NATO, whose success,  despite a quite limited mandate, will ultimately be evaluated against  the regime's survival or its collapse,' Jones said.  While Libyan rebel groups continue to fight forces loyal to Gaddafi,  renewed debate over the international community's approach to  mitigating the conflict - including whether to officially recognise  Libya's Transitional National Council, encourage defections to erode  support for Gaddafi, and whether to arm the rebels or expand the NATO  mandate to leverage a ceasefire — remain as central questions for  those advocating prolonged U. S.  and European involvement.  'Our main issue is the recognition of the [Transitional National]  Council.  We believe recognition is very important to give the council  credibility in the international community,' Ambassador Ali Suleiman  Aujali, the representative to the U. S.  for the council, said at the  Middle East Institute conference.  'I'm very confident now than ever before that the revolution in Libya  will win… As far as Gaddafi is there, this is the main danger,'  Aujali added.  On Monday, the International Criminal Court issued arrest warrants  for Gaddafi, his son Saif al-Islam and the Libyan intelligence chief  Abdullah Senoussi, in what some analysts believe will embolden  Gaddafi's determination to fight.  As the Obama administration weighs its policy options in Libya, the  realties between policymaking for those holding the office of  president and running as a candidate for president remain in stark  contrast.  'The president does not have power under the Constitution to  unilaterally authorise a military attack in a situation that does not  involve stopping an actual or imminent threat to the nation,' then- presidential candidate Barack Obama said in December 2007.  