The unilateral U. S.  raid that killed Osama bin Laden created a  spike in mutual recriminations between U. S.  and Pakistani  politicians, but their fundamental conflict of interest over  Afghanistan was already driving the two countries toward  serious confrontation. The pivotal event in relations between the Barack Obama  administration and Pakistan was the decision by Obama to escalate the  war in Afghanistan in 2009, despite the knowledge that Pakistan was  committed to supporting the Taliban insurgents as a strategic policy  in its conflict with India.  Obama launched a desperate, last-minute effort to get some kind of  commitment from the Pakistanis to reduce their support for the  Taliban before the decision to escalate the war.  But he did not  reconsider the decision after that effort had clearly failed.   It was always understood within the Obama administration that any  public recognition that Pakistan was committed to supporting the  Taliban could be politically dangerous to the war effort.  As a  result, Obama's national security team decided early on to deny the  complicity of Pakistani Chief of Staff Ashfaq Parvez Kayani and  director of the ISI intelligence agency Shuja Pasha, despite the  knowledge that they were fully behind the policy.  On Mar.  26, 2009, a story in the New York Times provided the most  detailed news media account up to that date of Pakistani assistance  to the Taliban.  But the story quoted anonymous U. S.  officials as  blaming 'mid-level ISI operatives' and expressing doubt that top  Pakistani officials in Islamabad were directly coordinating the  clandestine efforts by ISI operatives to assist the Taliban.  That did not reflect the briefing Obama had gotten from George W.   Bush's director of national intelligence, Mike McConnell, after his  election.  McConnell had learned from communications intercepts that  Kayani considered the Haqqani network, which was being targeted as  the most serious threat to U. S.  troops n Afghanistan, as a 'strategic  asset'. As Obama approached a decision on Gen.  Stanley A.  McChrystal's  request for another troop increase of as much as 40,000 troops, the  Pakistani military's determination to use the Taliban and the Haqqani  network to advance Pakistani interests in Afghanistan was a major  issue in the policy debate.  Opponents of the troop surge request, including Vice-President Joe  Biden, deputy national security adviser Tom Donilon and Afghanistan  War coordinator Douglas Lute, argued that the Pakistanis were not  going to change their policy toward Afghanistan, according to Bob  Woodward's account in 'Obama's Wars'. Biden argued in a meeting on Sep.  13, 2009 that Pakistan was  determined to avoid an Afghan government 'led by a Pashtun  sympathetic to India' — i. e. , Afghan President Hamid Karzai.  The  conclusion was that the Pakistanis would continue to aid the  insurgency the U. S.  was trying to defeat.  Despite that argument, as the policymaking process was entering its  final weeks, Obama tried to exert high-level pressure on Pakistan. In a Nov.  11, 2009 letter to Pakistani President Asif Ali Zardari,  Obama said Pakistan's use of such 'proxy groups' as Haqqani and the  Taliban would no longer be tolerated, as Woodward recounts.  National  Security Adviser James Jones and Counterterrorism adviser John  Brennan were sent to Islamabad to deliver the message. Obama wanted Pakistan to understand that he would take unilateral  action against the Taliban and Haqqani safe havens in Pakistan,  including accelerated drone strikes and commando raids, unless  Pakistani forces attacked them. That message was clearly received.  A Pakistani official told the New  York Times, 'Jones's message was if that Pakistani help wasn't  forthcoming, the United States would have to do it themselves. ' The week of Nov.  17, CIA Director Leon Panetta met with Pasha and  other top Pakistani officials, and complained about the presence of  the Taliban leadership headquarters in Quetta, Baluchistan, according  to Woodward's account.  He cited intelligence that bombs were being  made there, then 'taken across the border and blowing up Americans'.  Panetta proposed joint U. S. -Pakistani operations on the ground aimed  at the Quetta Shura, but Kayani refused. In a response to Obama's letter late in November, Zardari voiced the  Pakistani military's rationale for Pakistan's use of Afghan  insurgents to protect its interests in Pakistan.  He charged that  'neighbouring intelligence agencies' — meaning India — 'are using  Afghan soil to perpetuate violence in Pakistan. ' And Zardari did not give a clear response to Obama's invitation to  plan joint operations against those forces. When Obama met with his national security team for the final time on  Nov.  29, he knew that the pressure tactic had failed.  Lute, Obama's  Afghanistan coordinator, warned that Pakistani policy was one of four  major, interacting risks of a troop surge policy.  But Obama approved a plan for 30,000 additional troops anyway,  suggesting that the decision was driven by the political-bureaucratic  momentum of the war rather than by a rational assessment of cost,  risk and benefit.  Throughout 2010, the Pakistani military continued to make clear its  refusal to compromise on its interests in Afghanistan.  In late  January, U. S.  and Pakistani authorities picked up Mullah Ghani  Baradar, the second-ranking official in the Taliban Quetta Shura, in  a raid in Karchi — apparently without realising in advance that  Baradar was present.  But when the United States sought to extradite Baradar to  Afghanistan, the Pakistanis refused.  And Baradar and several other  members of the Quetta Shura who had been detained by the Pakistanis  were reported in October 2010 to have been released.  In a January 2011 interview with Public Broadcasting System's  'Frontline', Gen.  David Petraeus, by then the commander in  Afghanistan, was asked about Pakistan's release of top Taliban  leaders.  'We've actually had a conversation on this very recently,'  said Petraeus blandly, 'and in fact there has been a request for  information…. ' Two National Intelligence Estimates on Afghanistan and Pakistan in  December 2010 pointed once again to the centrality of Pakistani  policy to the outcome of the U. S.  war effort in Afghanistan.  The NIE on Afghanistan concluded that the United States was unlikely  to succeed in Afghanistan unless Pakistan changed its policy to take  military action against insurgent sanctuaries in Pakistan.  But the  estimate on Pakistan made it clear that no such change in Pakistani  policy could be expected.  In mid-December, the Obama administration issued a five-page summary  of its December 2010 review of the Afghanistan War, which concluded  that the 'gains' were 'fragile and reversible' and that consolidating  those gains 'will require that we make more progress with Pakistan to  eliminate sanctuaries for violent extremist networks. 'Immediately after that review, the New York Times reported a military  proposal for cross-border raids into Pakistan aimed at capturing  Taliban commanders for interrogation back in Afghanistan.  Beginning in late 2010, moreover, the U. S.  infiltrated hundreds of  unilateral intelligence agents into Pakistan, suggesting an intention  to carry out further cross-border raids.  Those moves had already alarmed Pakistan's military leaders well  before the U. S.  raid against bin Laden's compound in Abbottabad. And in a classified report sent to Congress in early April, the Obama  administration strongly criticised Pakistan's failure to attack  insurgent safe havens in Mohmand in northwest Pakistan for three  straight years, as reported by the New York Times Apr.  5.  Moeed Yusuf, director of the South Asia programme at the U. S.   Institute of Peace, who has been leading a study of Pakistani elite  opinion on relations with the United States, believes the crisis in  U. S. -Pakistan relations can be blamed on a failure of both  governments to acknowledge explicitly the existence of a fundamental  conflict of interests.  'If there is a strategic divergence of interests, I think Pakistan  needs to put it on the table,' said Yusuf.  Pakistani leaders 'need to  be very candid about why it's not in their interests' to do what  Washington wants, he said. If the interests at stake are not brought into the open, Yusuf  suggested, 'A rupture is possible. ' *Gareth Porter is an investigative historian and journalist  specialising in U. S.  national security policy.  The paperback edition  of his latest book, 'Perils of Dominance: Imbalance of Power and the  Road to War in Vietnam', was published in 2006. 