Sudan's disputed border town of Abyei is ablaze, with gunmen  looting properties days after troops from the government in  Khartoum entered the area, U. N.  peacekeepers say. The peacekeepers belonging to UNMIS, the U. N.  mission in Sudan, said  on Monday that the burning and looting was perpetrated 'by armed  elements' but it was not clear whether they were from the north or  the south. 'UNMIS strongly condemns the burning and looting currently being  perpetrated by armed elements in Abyei town,' the peacekeepers said  in a statement. 'The Sudan Armed Forces (SAF) are responsible for maintaining law and  order in the areas they control. 'UNMIS calls upon the government of Sudan to urgently ensure that the  Sudan Armed Forces fulfil their responsibility and intervene to stop  these criminal acts. 'Sudanese government officials in the north say their troops moved  into Abyei - inhabited by two tribes backed by the south and north  respectively - to drive the Sudan People's Liberation Army (SPLA)  out, who they said had been occupying Abyei since last December. The SPLA is the armed force of South Sudan, which held a referendum  for independence in January and is due to become an independent state  in July. Thousands of civilians are reported to have fled southwards after  northern SAF troops and tanks took control of the town on Saturday. South Sudan also claims Abyei district, which has special status  under a 2005 peace deal that ended 22 years of south-north civil war,  and has called the occupation 'illegal'. 'War zone'Barnaba Benjamin, the minister of information in South Sudan, told Al  Jazeera that north Sudanese troops had 'illegally and  unconstitutionally invaded Abyei'. 'What the Sudanese forces are doing now [is] they are looting the  place; they are burning the place,' he said. 'They have made thousands of people - children, women and the elderly  - a humanitarian disaster.  This is what they have been doing.  They  didn't find any SPLA troops in Abyei. 'Their claim that there are SPLA troops in Abyei is not true . . .  They  entered the town without any confrontation . . .  So why are they there?'Why are they bombing the civilian targets; the villages around? They  are airlifting Misseriya Arab tribes into the territory to occupy the  areas of Dinka Ng'ok. 'The nomadic Arab Misseriya tribe, which is backed by the north,  grazes its cattle in Abyei.  The Dinka Ng'ok tribe, backed by the  south, lives in Abyei year round. A senior official from the ruling National Congress Party in  Khartoum, the capital of the north, denied the reports of looting but  called Abyei 'a war zone'. 'They [troops] are not looting the place,' Didiry Mohammad Ahmed told  Al Jazeera. 'We know that this place, right now, is a war zone.  The army is  struggling very hard to see to it that no looting happens, but  nonetheless some isolated incidents had happened. 'We are doing our very best right now - working in tandem with the  U. N.  mission in the region - to ensure no looting takes place.   Nothing can be traced back to our forces. 'U. N.  callAbyei's seizure, coming in the run-up to international recognition of  southern independence in July, has been condemned by world powers as  a threat to peace between north and south. Susan Rice, the U. S.  ambassador to the U. N. , called the escalation of  the situation in Abyei 'quite dangerous' as she visited the country  with U. N.  and British envoys. Tanks from northern Sudan rolled into the town of Abyei on Saturday  night, scattering southern troops that were there as part of a joint  security unit. Ban Ki-moon, the U. N.  secretary-general, called for an immediate end  to military action after a U. N.  compound was also hit with mortar  fire. The seizure of Abyei followed an attack on a convoy of northern  soldiers by southern forces on Thursday and two days of aerial  bombardment of the area by the north. *Published under an agreement with Al-Jazeera. 