Escalating violence in Abyei, the largest of several towns in  the disputed borders between North and South Sudan, has  displaced thousands of people and, according to U. S.   officials, is threatening the viability of both the 2005  Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA) and the soon-to-be  independence of Southern Sudan, set for Jul.  9, as the  potential for civil war between the two sides grows. After soldiers from the South's Sudan People's Liberation Army (SPLA)  ambushed a U. N.  convoy traveling through Abyei on May 19, the  Sudanese Armed Forces (SAF), under orders from the Northern capital  of Khartoum, attacked and occupied towns throughout the territory in  an apparent response to the SPLA assault.   'We feel that the attack on the U. N.  convoy was deplorable and wrong,  but we feel that the response of the [Khartoum] government was  disproportionate and irresponsible.  We think [SAF] forces should be  withdrawn,' Princeton Lyman, the U. S.  Special Envoy to Sudan, said  Monday.  Oxfam, a human rights group, reports that more people have been  killed in Sudan in the first months of 2011 than in all of 2010. According to official estimates from the Sudanese government, 70 SAF  soldiers have been killed, a number the U. N.  has contested.  As the official date approaches for Southern Sudan's independence,  which was decided in a January referendum, a number of issues,  including the distribution of oil revenues, and the demarcation of a  remaining 20 percent of the 2,100-kilometre border between the North  and South, remain unresolved. Lyman emphasised that the continued 'occupation' of Abyei is a  violation of the CPA, and thus poses a risk to the plan for full  normalisation of Sudanese relations with the U. S. , an arrangement  that would include inducements - such as removing Sudan from the  U. S. 's State Sponsors of Terrorism list, and a debt relief of up to  38 billion dollars - for a peaceful transition of the largest country  on the African continent into two independent nations. 'If there is no cost to the Khartoum regime's commission of  atrocities and to the dishonoring of agreements, then why would  anything change in Sudan?' John Prendergast, co-founder of the Enough  Project, an advocacy group, asked in a statement on Monday. 'Darfur is deteriorating, Abyei is a war zone, and pockets of the  South have been set aflame by Khartoum-supported militias.   It is  time to impose serious consequences for the Khartoum regime's use of  overwhelming military force to deal with every challenge it faces,'  Prendergast added. In a possible sign of Southern government officials' willingness to  negotiate a peace deal over Abyei, Luka Biong Deng, a senior Southern  minister in Sudanese President Omar al-Bashir's national unity  cabinet, resigned Tuesday after characterising the violence in Abyei  as 'war crimes' that have resulted in 15,000 displaced persons,  according to the U. N. Since the CPA's inception, control over Abyei has been a bitter point  of contention between the North and South mainly due to its  importance as a critical water source - the Kiir River provides  priceless sustenance for crops during the dry season- and its once- vast oil reserves in areas bordering the town.  The Permanent Court of Arbitration's ruling in 2009 on Abyei's  borders reaffirmed the Ngok Dinka's (an ethnic group loyal to the  South) claim over the majority of the town, essentially guaranteeing  that any referendum held on the determination of Abeyi's allegiance  would be in favour of South Sudan. A referendum, originally planned to coincide with the national  referendum in January, on the self-determination of Abyei has yet to  be held, while the terms of the court's ruling - which were widely  accepted at the time by all parties involved - left the Misseriya, an  ethnic group of Arab descent loyal to the Khartoum government, and  the North to defend their own claims to the disputed territory.  But some analysts argue that Northern control over Abyei serves more  as a point for the Khartoum government's political leverage in the  South's secession, particularly given remaining U. S.  sanctions on  Khartoum's government, and the already decrepit state of the North's  economy as it prepares to take even larger losses in oil revenues  once the South secedes.  'Abyei itself has become the defining issue in north-south relations  and the defining issue in answering the question of whether Khartoum  will allow for the peaceful succession of the south or not,' Dr.  Eric  Reeves, a regional specialist, told IPS.  'Khartoum is now obviously  making it look as if the SPLA is the provocateur. 'Since the national referendum in January, numerous reports have  documented the North's buildup of an offensive military capability on  their southern border, making discussions over not insignificant  issues such as who should be counted as residents of Abyei seemingly  irrelevant in the face of what amounted to premature preparation for  armed conflict.  Whether Southern officials will approach the SAF's occupation of  Abyei with a measured political response as they have in past  conflicts, or with calls for an armed response in kind, remains to be  seen.  'One pole would argue that as goes Abyei so go we, we will fight if  Khartoum attacks Abyei, now we're still waiting to see what the SPLA  military response will be…[T]hey have so far understood that  restraint will be the best response,' Reeves added.  Since President Obama took office in 2009, U. S.  policy has officially  centred around three pillars — the genocide in Darfur, implementation  of the CPA, and the mitigation of the threat from terrorist  organisations operating in Sudan.  But the violence in Abyei is testing the resolve of U. S.  diplomats in  securing peaceful negotiations before the Jul.  9 deadline and whether  the advantages of normalisation will be enough incentive, or if  measures that penalise the aggressive behaviour are necessary.  'The U. S.  has been excessively cautious.  We should be creating a  timeline in Khartoum's mind for a withdrawal…and say if this is going  to be a negotiated issue, that every day Khartoum stays in Abyei  there will be a further postponement in removing them from the list  of state sponsors of terrorism,' Reeves told IPS. 