While most of the world is closely watching the Middle East,  monitoring the human rights situations in Bahrain, Syria,  Libya and Israel, the International Crisis Group (ICG) is  keeping its eye on neighbouring Central Asia. On Tuesday, the group released a report highlighting growing security  threats in Tajikistan - the country it deems 'by most measures,  Central Asia's poorest state', and which is increasingly facing  internal and external security threats. The report focuses primarily on insurgencies in the eastern region of  Rasht.  Military operations against the warlords and young insurgents  there have been unsuccessful, and in 2010 resulted in a fragile peace  deal between the government and those it had accused of terrorism. After a 2009 ambush and continued fighting throughout 2010  'demonstrated that someone in the Rasht area was capable of deploying  trained deadly force,' President Emomali Rakhmon arranged a deal with  United Tajik Opposition (UTO) member Mirzokhuja Akhmadov, who was  blamed for the assault.  Akhmadov and his followers gave up their weapons in exchange for full  amnesty, and became allies of the government. 'The 2010 Rasht operation dealt a disastrous blow to the image and  what remained of the fighting capacity of Tajik military and security  forces,' the report said, and while Tajikistan's army appears weak in  the face of national warlords, the ICG report also raises concerns  about the threat posed by the Islamic Movement of Uzbekistan, or IMU,  which is wreaking havoc in neighbouring Afghanistan. The IMU is a guerilla group 'with a vision of an Islamist caliphate,  that is fighting in Afghanistan alongside the Taliban,' said Paul  Quinn-Judge, Crisis Group Central Asia project director, adding,  'Tajikistan must hope it remains preoccupied there. 'The report cautions that a weakened Tajikistan could catch the  interest of the Central Asian guerrillas, as Afghanistan's conflict  draws nearer the 1,400-km Afghan-Tajik border.  Following the army's efforts to quell the Rasht uprisings, only about  30 soldiers remain in its sole well-trained counterinsurgency unit.   Meanwhile, Afghan fighters have been steady infiltrating Tajikistan  for years, and 'Tajikistan has almost no capacity to tackle a  dedicated insurgent force,' the report says. These security threats are stemming from new generation of guerillas  emerging within both Tajikistan and the IMU, according to the report.   'They are mostly men in their twenties with little memory of the  Tajik civil war of 1992-1997,' it added, referring to the five year  ethnic war that left some 50,000 to 100,000 people dead. It said this development has 'punctured' the assumption that Tajiks  are too damaged by the memory of war to turn on the regime - a regime  which continues to provide incentive for revolt.  'Corruption remains at a breathtaking level,' Quinn-Judge said.  The  Tajik government is suspected of smuggling narcotics from Afghanistan  to China and Russia, and thus intentionally leaving the Afghan border  insecure. And the country's corrupt politics and weak army are further matched  with a 'moribund' economy and degraded infrastructure, according to  the report. With these grievances in mind, some predict that the wave of citizen  uprisings spreading across the Arab world will douse Tajikistan as  well.  'President Rakhmon denies that the North African scenario of popular  unrest and revolt could happen in Tajikistan', said Robert Templer,  Crisis Group's Asia programme director. 'But Tajikistan is so vulnerable that a small, localised problem  could quickly spiral into a threat to the regime's existence,' he  said, adding, 'Tajikistan is not immune. 'The report offers recommendations for both the government of  Tajikistan and the international community.  It calls on the Tajik  government to repeal its bans on moderate Islamist groups that  repudiate the use of violence, and to encourage their participation  in political and social life. It asks Russia, China, and the United States to assess the risks to  the Afghan-Tajik border and to discuss measures to reinforce border  security.  It also asked for a reconfiguration of foreign aid strategies,  suggesting conditionality as a norm and special rewards for reform.   'Investing now in developing aid staff expertise in Tajikistan and  Central Asia would pay significant dividends,' it says. 