In a sign of growing war weariness in Congress and among the  general public, the Republican-led House of Representatives  voted Thursday to bar the deployment of U. S.  troops to Libya  and narrowly defeated a provision requiring President Barack  Obama to submit a plan for withdrawing U. S.  troops from  Afghanistan. The latter measure, one of dozens of proposed amendments to the 690- billion-dollar 2011 defence authorisation bill, was defeated 204-215.   Despite its defeat, the amendment, which is designed to press Obama  to accelerate plans for the U. S.  troop withdrawal that is scheduled  to begin Jul.  1, got 42 more votes than a similar measure received  last year. Although the administration opposed the amendment, all but eight  Democratic lawmakers voted for it.  They were joined by more than two  dozen Republicans, most of whom were voted into office for the first  time last November. 'It sends a strong signal to the president that the U. S.  House of  Representatives and the American people want change,' Democratic Rep.   Jim McGovern, who co-sponsored the amendment both this year and last,  said shortly after the vote. 'The White House has got to be worried about its Afghanistan war  strategy when an overwhelming majority of the Democrats in the House  and 26 Republicans are saying the president needs to tell us how this  war is going to end,' said Jim Cason of the Friends Committee on  National Legislation (FCNL), a Quaker lobby group. The House also adopted amendments banning the establishment of  military bases in Libya and stating explicitly that approval of this  year's defence budget should not be construed as an endorsement of  Washington's more than two-month-old military intervention in Libya.  In spite of the 1973 War Powers Act, which requires the president to  withdraw U. S.  military forces from active hostilities within 60 days  if Congress has not approved their deployment, Obama has not yet  submitted a request, much to the frustration of many lawmakers on  both sides of the aisle. Even as lawmakers indicated growing concern about the mounting costs  and consequences of the military interventions in Afghanistan and  Libya, however, hawkish Republicans, bolstered by a handful of  Democrats approved a provision authorising the president to use  military force against terrorism suspects in any country around the  world where they may be found. That provision, which was attached to the authorisation bill by the  powerful Republican chairman of the House Armed Services Committee  one week after the killing by U. S.  Special Forces of Al-Qaeda chief  Osama bin Laden in Pakistan, survived an attempt to repeal it by a  187-234 margin.  The measure, which would significantly expand the authorisation  approved by Congress in 2001 to take military action against those  responsible for the 9/11 attacks, was opposed by the White House.  It is also considered unlikely to be approved by the Democrat-led  Senate which is scheduled to begin drafting its own version of the  2011 defence bill in mid-June.  The two houses will eventually have to  reconcile their different versions before the bill can go to Obama  for signature or veto. The latest votes, however, come amid growing unease about the course  of Washington's military intervention in Libya, as well as a fierce  debate — both inside and outside the administration - over U. S.   strategy in Afghanistan in the aftermath of bin Laden's killing. More than two months since the U. N.  authorised a no-fly zone over  Libya, U. S.  and Western hopes that the regime of Col.  Moammar Gaddafi  would quickly collapse have been frustrated, and, as Obama made clear  in a press conference with British Prime Minister David Cameron  Wednesday, the current conflict may continue for a much longer  period. Much to the frustration of both Britain and France, which led the  drive to intervene, Obama has always insisted that Washington's  military role would be 'limited' - confined mostly to refuelling,  intelligence, and other support - and that other NATO powers and  their Arab allies would have to bear most of the burden. Despite the relatively limited nature of Washington's involvement,  Congress, as well as the general public, has become increasingly  anxious both about the costs of sustaining that intervention and the  strategy for bringing it to an end.  That anxiety was reflected in the votes over the past two days on the  defence bill, particularly by the easy passage of amendments banning  the deployment of U. S.  troops to Libya, the establishment of any  military base there, and the explicit assertion that Congress has not  authorised the ongoing deployment.  As noted by the Congressional Quarterly, the last amendment was 'so  non-controversial that it was adopted by voice vote, as was another  amendment that requires the administration to report on the long-term  costs of U. S.  military operations in Libya. ' Last week, the Pentagon  reported that Libya-related operations through mid-May had cost close  to one billion dollars. More significant, however, was the near-majority support garnered by  the amendment requiring Obama to submit a withdrawal plan for  Afghanistan, where about 100,000 U. S.  troops are currently deployed.   The plan, according to the amendment, should provide for 'an  accelerated transition of U. S.  military and security operations in  Afghanistan to the Government of Afghanistan. 'Obama has promised to begin withdrawing troops Jul.  1 with the  understanding that all combat troops will be out in 2014. The administration is currently engaged in an intense internal debate  on the pace of that withdrawal, and, specifically, how many troops  will be withdrawn this summer.  While the U. S.  commander in Afghanistan, Gen.  David Petraeus, has  reportedly urged only a nominal drawdown of at most 5,000 and the  continuation of the current 'counter-insurgency' strategy (COIN),  Vice President Joe Biden and Obama's political advisers have called  for a more substantial reduction, as well as the adoption of a  'counter-terrorist' strategy (CT) that would be less costly and  permit Washington to withdraw most of its remaining forces more  quickly. As currently conducted, the COIN strategy is costing the U. S.   Treasury about 10 billion dollars a month. The unexpectedly strong vote in favour of the amendment co-sponsored  by McGovern and a bipartisan group of other lawmakers is likely to  strengthen the hand of the pro-CT forces within the administration. 'Five thousand on Jul.  1 and nothing else, that won't fly,' warned  Democratic Rep.  John Garamendi during Thursday's debate.  'That will  create a great deal of anger. 'The fact that more than two dozen Republicans — four times as many as  last year and most of them newly elected - backed the measure was  also taken here as another sign that patience with what has become  the longest foreign war in U. S.  history is running out.  *Jim Lobe's blog on U. S.  foreign policy can be read at  http://www. lobelog. com. 