More than half of Georgia’s population still lives in abject poverty due to  economic stagnation, worsening living standards, rising unemployment and low  pay nearly nine years after the 2003 bloodless ‘Rose Revolution’ that promised  post-Soviet economic revival, a new political course and better living conditions. Following a military parade Thursday marking Georgia’s independence from Russia, two people were  reported killed and many more injured when police used water cannons, tear gas and rubber bullets to  break up an opposition rally against President Mikheil Saakashvili’s government. The Georgian opposition has taken to the streets to press for the resignation of the current government  that have failed to live up to people’s expectations.  They also claim that after the ‘Rose Revolution’  there were many opportunities and resources for normalising Georgian-Russian relations, which would  have made it possible to solve vital domestic economic problems. 'I think one of the key mistakes of [President Mikheil] Saakashvili’s government is that it considers rule  of law not as the major priority and there is no judicial independence,' Eka Gigauri, executive director of  Transparency International Georgia, told IPS.  'Good legislation remains theoretically only as paperwork  and are not duly implemented.  Further, media environment is not free and independent, and many  influential channels are state controlled. 'Experts say there can only be speedy improvement if radical economic development and political  reforms are implemented with strong support and participation of young progressive groups. In spite of the fact that after the protests in 2009, the government initiated negotiations with  opposition parties on the improvement of the electoral environment, no tangible results have been  achieved.  Negotiations are stopped and the government does not want to compromise and create the  possibility for Georgian people to express their will on fair elections, Gigauri said. After the Rose Revolution, the Georgian government could not manage to improve the social conditions  of the population, the unemployment rate is still high, and people are suffering from the high prices  and low social conditions, according to Gigauri. Building of democracy in Georgia started after the Rose Revolution and that still remains the key  challenge.  It is obvious that any country with weak government institutions faces challenges in  implementing democratic values, but in the case of Georgia, there was an initial achievement in fighting  petty corruption, Gigauri admitted. However, she added that 'democratic principles have been sacrificed for stability and security of the  country.  The main challenge of the government remains to strengthen democratic institutions and to  elaborate long-term reform strategy.  The reforms in civil and public sectors fall below expectations.   People talk about corruption among the elite, however this is very difficult to prove even by civil society  organisations. 'Some experts have mixed views.  Zviad Eradze, president of the Youth Resource Center here, a non- profit institution that works on youth mobilisation for development and political programmes, said the  Georgian leaders and the public believe that opposition protests were funded by Moscow - indirectly  referring to the Kremlin.  Relations between Russia and Georgia have dwindled since Saakashvili's  election in 2004, reaching an ultimate low in 2008, when the two countries fought a short war over two  breakaway Georgian republics. 'At the same time, what I observe from here is that they [opposition groups] do not have support from  the general public,' Eradze said.  'Secondly, all governments have mistakes, among them is Saakashvili’s,  but none of the mistakes are critical.  As for the corruption level in Georgia, I would say there is no  corruption.  The situation is much better than before. 'As a former Soviet republic, Georgia is a sovereign state in the Caucasus region of Eurasia and it is  located at the crossroads of western Asia and eastern Europe, bounded to the west by the Black Sea, to  the north by Russia, to the southwest by Turkey, to the south by Armenia, and to the southeast by  Azerbaijan. Georgia, with a population of almost 4. 7 million, has an agricultural economy and little industrial  production.  Saakashvili, a U. S. -educated lawyer, has ruled the former Soviet republic since the Rose  Revolution that catapulted him into power from obscurity.  He took over from Edward Shevernadze, who  became the president after Soviet collapse in 1991. Some international organisations have assisted Georgia’s economy.  Inga Paichadze, external affairs  officer at the World Bank office in Tbilisi, declined to comment on democracy and human rights issues  in Georgia, but explained to IPS that the World Bank provides its support to Georgia through the  Country Partnership Strategy (CPS), which now spans 2010-2013. Prepared against the backdrop of the twin crises of the August 2008 conflict and the global economic  downturn, the CPS was built around two pillars, according to the World Bank CPS report: (i) meeting  post-conflict and vulnerability needs, and (ii) strengthening competitiveness for post-crisis recovery  and growth. Pleased with strong results, the World Bank is providing 235 million dollars in new financing over the  next two years to help sustain economic growth and support the needs of the vulnerable.  Much of this  will go towards local and secondary roads and regional development, the report said. Early this year, the U. S.  ambassador to the South Caucasus also announced that the U. S.  was allocating  90 million dollars for democratic reforms in Georgia - a step that led Georgian opposition leader Nino  Burdzhanadze to say that the West had finally begun treating Tbilisi 'adequately'. Despite external efforts, Georgians seem dissatisfied and frustrated about the pace of development.   They restarted a series of public protests in May that were often brutally dispersed by pro-Saakashvili’s  security forces. Leaders of the Nation-Wide Assembly of Georgia (NWAG), which organised political action, were joined  by nearly all the opposition groups in saying 'unity of opposition forces and the entire society was  necessary for the resignation of Saakashvili and the holding of early elections'. Some officials argue that Saakashvili enjoys support of the majority of citizens and will not resign until  the end of his term of office - Oct.  2013.  The opposition is unable to force Saakashvili to step down  ahead of time, they say. 'Any political standoff is a natural phenomenon for a democratic society, but the politics ends where  armed persons are brought to the battlefield.  Unfortunately, the Georgian history has seen examples  where such irresponsible actions and a military standoff provoked by politicians caused fateful and  deplorable results that we are still reaping today,' said Giorgi Targamadze, leader of the Georgian  Christian Democratic Movement (CDM).  'People who wear the uniform of a motherland defender do not  need additional explanations that this weapon must be used against Georgia’s enemies and not for  opposing their own fellow-citizens. 'Georgia’s opposition groups rallied with frustration and disappointment over the results of the Rose  Revolution, and have called for reforms or complete regime change.  Georgia’s Deputy Foreign Minister  Nino Kalandadze told reporters that 'the country’s authorities recognise the right to freedom of  association.  This is the principle signed into law by the country that we respect. '  