The leaked reports over the past two weeks of a series of  meetings between U. S.  officials and a Taliban figure close to  leader Mullah Omar seemed to point to real progress toward a  negotiated settlement of the war in Afghanistan. But in fact the talks are part of a Barack Obama administration  strategy aimed at putting pressure on the Taliban leadership in part  by dividing it from Pakistan as well as bolstering Obama's domestic  support for the war. Senior administration officials hope to use the talks to sow  suspicion between the Taliban and their main ally, thus weakening the  Taliban resolve to negotiate on a peace settlement only if the United  States offers a timetable for troop withdrawal.  Afghan and German officials have said that U. S.  officials met three  times in Qatar and Germany in recent months with Tayyeb Agha, an aide  of the top Taliban leader Mullah Omar, according to reports in the  Washington Post and Der Spiegel.  Agha is about as close to Mullah Omar as any official in the Taliban.   He has long been Omar's 'head of office' and a 'very close  confident', according to Thomas Ruttig of the Afghanistan Analysts  Network.  The Hamid Karzai regime was fully briefed on those 'exploratory'  meetings, but Pakistani officials have been kept in the dark as part  of a strategy of sowing discord between Pakistan and the Taliban  leadership. That strategy began to emerge when UK Special Representative for  Afghanistan and Pakistan Mark Sedwill visited Pakistan last week. Sedwill told journalists that the Taliban leadership was engaged in  talks with 'various stakeholders with full backing of the U. S.  with  the sole aim of finding a solution to Afghanistan from within,  without any involvement of foreign players. ' He was clearly hoping to rattle the Pakistani military leadership and  civilian government, which have complained in the past that they have  not been told about contacts with the Taliban.  Sedwill's carefully  worded statement hinted that talks with the Taliban were moving  toward an accord between the Taliban and the Karzai government  without Pakistan's participation, thus playing into Pakistan's worst  fears.  He said various channels are now open to the Taliban, and that no  single entity is fully aware of these talks.  That was clearly  intended to imply that the Taliban are already involved in secret  talks with Karzai. The UK envoy said he had come with this 'special message' from the  British government and hoped the Pakistanis 'fully grasped it'. That unusually harsh and even condescending language sought to convey  the U. S. -British intention to freeze Pakistan out of the diplomatic  action, despite earlier assurances that Pakistan would be fully  involved in the peace process.  That policy obviously seeks to increase the tensions between the  Taliban and the Pakistani military.  They share an interest in an  outcome in Afghanistan that reflects greater Taliban influence over  the country's politics, but Taliban leaders and commanders have long  resented their dependence on Pakistan.  The Pakistani military, meanwhile, is believed to have worried that  the Taliban will reach an accord with Karzai at Pakistan's expense.   It is well known that the Taliban prefer to have an office outside  Pakistan that could be used as a venue for peace talks, free from  direct Pakistani interference. But the reality of the U. S. -Taliban talks does not support the line  being promoted so aggressively by Washington through its British  ally.  Nor are the Taliban likely to cut Pakistan out of the loop on  their talks with the United States and Karzai. For one thing, the United States is still unwilling to offer the  Taliban an office in Turkey or elsewhere.  Instead, as Sedwill  revealed in Islamabad last week, that concession, as well as the  removal of Taliban leaders from the United Nations 'blacklist', will  only be granted in return for 'confidence-building' measures by the  Taliban side.  Sedwill said the U. S.  and UK would 'need to see what concessions the  Taliban would be willing to first cede…. ' The most likely concession demanded of the Taliban would be to agree  to negotiate formally with the Karzai regime.  As a U. S.  official told  Karen DeYoung of the Washington Post, the Taliban 'is going to have  to talk with both the Afghans and Americans'. The Obama administration is still demanding, moreover, that those  talks must be 'Afghan-led'.  But the idea that Taliban will give up what would be one of the last  concessions in talks before the United States has even begun to  negotiate reflects an assessment of the bargaining position of the  two sides that is not shared by those outside the Obama  administration. Both the Taliban and the Pakistani military appear to believe that  the Taliban has a stronger bargaining position at this point than  Obama.  Last month Pakistan's foreign secretary Salman Bashir challenged the  premise of the Obama administration that U. S.  military pressure is  altering the balance of power in Afghanistan in Washington's favour. The Taliban, meanwhile, have made it clear in private contacts with  representatives of the Karzai regime that they won't negotiate with  either the United States or Karzai without a public indication from  the United States that it will negotiate the withdrawal of U. S.  and  NATO troops.  A member of the executive board of Karzai's High Peace Council,  Mohamad Ismail Qasem Yar, told IPS that the Taliban had insisted in  contacts with Afghan officials on one precondition for peace talks.   'There is one thing that they want to make clear and they want to be  sure of, which is a deadline for the withdrawal,' he said. In their public statements, however, the Taliban continue to insist  that they won't negotiate as long as foreign troops occupy the  country.  Michael Semple, who was deputy to the European Union special  representative for Afghanistan from 2004 to 2007, observes that the  idea of jihad against foreign troops is important to the morale of  the Taliban fighters and their supporters. The public demand for withdrawal before negotiations 'may be an  untenable position,' Semple told IPS, 'but the process of shifting  may be painful. ' Even though Taliban officials may be distrustful of Pakistan and may  now feel more vulnerable because of the killing of Osama bin Laden by  U. S.  special forces, they are not likely to be panicked into making  concessions to Washington.  Although it was widely believed that Pakistan detained Mullah Baradar  and other high Taliban officials, including Tayyeb Agha, in early  2010 because of the suspicion that the Taliban were talking with the  Karzai regime behind their backs, the real reasons for the arrests  suggest a different worry. Baradar was picked up in a joint ISI-CIA operation, but it was later  reported by U. S.  sources that neither intelligence agency had known  in advance that Baradar would be at the site of the raid.  In any case, Baradar, Agha and the other key Taliban officials were  later released, suggesting that the Pakistanis were primarily  concerned with averting their capture and detention by the United  States.  Pakistani warnings to the Taliban against contacts with the  Karzai regime that were not coordinated with ISI could obviously be  communicated without temporary detention. The widely-publicised U. S.  talks with the Taliban also serve a  domestic political function for Obama.  One U. S.  official told the  Washington Post that Obama would cite the talks with the Taliban in  his mid-year policy announcement as evidence that he was making good  on Secretary of State Hilary Clinton's promised to produce  negotiations.  *Walid Fazly contributed reporting from Kabul. Gareth Porter is an investigative historian and journalist  specialising in U. S.  national security policy.  The paperback edition  of his latest book, 'Perils of Dominance: Imbalance of Power and the  Road to War in Vietnam', was published in 2006. 