Forces loyal to Ivorian President Alessane Ouattara have  carried out indiscriminate torture, rape, extrajudicial  killings, and other acts of violence and abuse, according to  an investigation by Human Rights Watch. Purportedly carried out in retaliation against members of forces  loyal to former president Laurent Gbagbo, these abuses and killings  were found instead to have been carried out against civilians or  unarmed people and were often based upon one's ethnic affiliation or  which presidential candidate the victim supposedly backed. In a report released Thursday, Human Rights Watch said that since  mid-April, when armed forces loyal to Ouattara, known as the  Republican Forces, managed to gain control of the capital city of  Abidjan, these forces have killed at least 149 of Gbagbo's 'real or  perceived' supporters.  The majority of the killings documented by Human Rights Watch were in  the Yopougon neighbourhood of Abidjan, which is known as a Gbagbo  stronghold. Following Ouattara's victory in the Ivorian presidential elections  last November, former president Gbagbo refused to step down.  Violent  clashes and fighting ensued, and forces loyal to both Ouattara and  Gbagbo continued the abuses and killings even after Gbagbo was  arrested on Apr.  11.  'Some of the abuses actually took place after Gbagbo was arrested,'  Rona Piligal, deputy director of the Africa Division at Human Rights  Watch, told IPS.  'Some of the abuses took place. . .  after Ouattara was  inaugurated. 'To her knowledge, the killings and abuses have continued through last  week. Human Rights Watch has called for the Ouattara government to place  commanders against whom there is credible evidence of implication in  killings, torture, or other severe abuse on immediate administrative  leave, pending investigation. Brutality on both sidesThe report drew on over 130 interviews with victims of and witnesses  to the violence.  In comparison to the 149 killed by pro-Ouattara  forces, forces loyal to Gbagbo killed at least 220 people before and  after Gbagbo's April arrest.  'They turned to me and asked my ethnic group,' recounted one victim  in the report.  'They then came back to me and said I was militia.   They beat me with their guns, with their fists.  They kept demanding  that I say that I was militia, that they'd only stop if I said so… It  didn't seem to make sense who they killed and who they took,' he  added. Elsewhere in the report, one member of the Republican Forces, who was  present at the execution of detainees, described what he had  witnessed, as well as the nonexistent selection process for choosing  victims. 'I promise you that no one can say what crime these men had  committed.  They were arrested simply because they had an appearance  that showed them as suspects of either being militiamen or those that  tell the militia about our movements,' he said. In addition to indiscriminate violence and executions, other accounts  shared horrific tales of rape, torture, looting, arbitrary  detainments, and other forms of inhumane treatment, by forces loyal  to both sides.  Particularly alarming is the fact that they were indiscriminate in  their abuse, and that civilians became victims.  In Yopougon, 'there  were civilians who were targeted simply because that was an area  where Gbagbo had drawn support,' Peligal told IPS.  'But as it turns  out, many of the militias that had been based in Yopougon had already  left. ' Ultimately, 'it was civilians that paid the price for abuses  committed by others,' she said. Political implicationsPresident Ouattara's administration has pledged to investigate the  violence and abuses, and to prosecute those responsible, said  Peligal.  Still, 'We haven't yet seen any action on their part,' she  added.  Currently, the prosecutor of the International Criminal Court is  conducting an investigation into the violence, and the United Nations  is conducting an inquiry.  Whether Ouattara will live up to his promises remains to be seen, but  keeping those promises will be crucial for his presidency and the  coming months in Cote d'Ivoire.  Corinne Dufka, senior West Africa researcher at Human Rights Watch,  said in the report, 'The hope of a new era following President  Ouattara's inauguration will fade fast unless these horrible abuses  against pro-Gbagbo groups stop immediately', and Ouattara keeps his  promises of investigating the abuses and prosecuting those  responsible.  