The world's eight nuclear states - the United States, Britain,  Russia, France, China, India, Pakistan and Israel -  collectively possess more than 20,500 nuclear weapons - a  decline of over 2,000 since 2009. But more than 5,000 of these devastating weapons are deployed and  ready for use, including nearly 2,000 that are kept in 'a state of  high operational alert'. The updated figures were released Tuesday by the Stockholm  International Peace Research Institute (SIPRI) in its Yearbook 2011. Currently, the two biggest nuclear arsenals are in Russia (11,000  nuclear weapons) and the United States (8,500), followed by France  (300), China (240), Britain (225), Pakistan (90-110), India (80-110)  and Israel (80). The SIPRI Yearbook says that modest cuts in U. S.  and Russian strategic  nuclear forces were agreed in April 2010 under the New Strategic Arms  Reduction Treaty (START). 'But both countries currently are either deploying new nuclear weapon  delivery systems, or have announced programmes to do so, and appear  determined to retain their nuclear arsenals for the indefinite  future,' it says. Meanwhile, India and Pakistan, two neighbouring nuclear rivals,  continue to develop new ballistic and cruise missile systems capable  of delivering nuclear weapons. 'They are also expanding their capacities to produce fissile material  for military purposes,' says SIPRI, an independent international  research institute focusing on arms control and disarmament.  Still, there has been little progress towards nuclear disarmament,  despite the reduction in the number of weapons. Asked about the disparity, Jonathan Granoff, president of the Global  Security Institute, told IPS that 'quantitative reductions are of  course to be praised, despite the qualitative offsets of modernisation  and robust funding of the nuclear weapons enterprise. 'However, overall progress will only be achieved when the compass point  of elimination is clearly set as the collective goal of nuclear haves  and have-nots together, he pointed out. Such clarity depends upon commencing the preparatory process to move  unambiguously toward a universal legally enforceable non- discriminatory ban on nuclear weapons achieved by a convention or by a  framework of instruments. 'With such a clear commitment, the step-by-step incremental  quantitative reductions will have enhanced meaning toward downgrading  the political and military significance of the weapons,' he added. The essential element, he said, is the collective commitment to  universal abolition. 'Rhetoric in this regard is credible only when backed by action,'  Granoff declared. SIPRI senior researcher Shannon Kile said it is a stretch to say that  the New START cuts agreed by the United States and Russia are a  genuine step towards nuclear disarmament when their planning for  nuclear forces is done on a time scale that encompasses decades, and  when nuclear modernisation is a major priority of their defence  policies. Jackie Cabasso, executive director of the Western States Legal  Foundation (WSLF), which monitors and analyses U. S.  nuclear weapons  programmes, told IPS the SIPRI report validates what she has been  saying for years - at least since the mid-1990s in connection with the  failed deal for U. S.  Senate ratification of the Comprehensive Test Ban  Treaty (CTBT) - essentially that U. S.  nuclear weapons planning is  based on the concept of 'fewer but newer; nuclear weapons forever'. The fact that the numbers of nuclear weapons have been drastically  reduced since their mind-boggling peak has been generally confused  with disarmament, when in fact, more than 20,000 nuclear weapons in  the hands of eight or nine states continues to represent an  intolerable threat to humanity and the earth, she noted. Despite the end of the Cold War, and despite U. S.  President Barack  Obama's lofty disarmament rhetoric, the threatened first use of  nuclear weapons remains at the core of the national security policy of  the only country that has thus far used nuclear weapons in war - the  United States, she pointed out. And this is mirrored in the national security policies of most of the  other nuclear armed states. The failed U. S.  Senate CTBT ratification deal, which cemented ever- increasing funding for the Stockpile Stewardship nuclear weapons  modernisation programme was replicated on steroids in the START  ratification package. This package essentially renders START as an anti-disarmament measure,  projecting modernisation of nuclear warheads and their delivery system  decades into the future, said Cabasso, winner of the 2008 Sean  MacBride Peace Prize awarded by the International Peace Bureau. 