U. N.  peacekeeping missions face myriad problems but they  remain the most effective strategy for dealing with post- conflict situations, says Page Fortna, a political science  professor at Columbia University who has extensively  researched the impact of various missions around the world. 'Warts and all, peacekeeping works,' says Fortuna. She nevertheless acknowledges that problems of contemporary  peacekeeping are legion. U. N.  missions are 'underfunded and understaffed, equipped with  ambiguous mandates, [and] they struggle with problems of  compatibility, including language, among troop contingents and of  communication between the U. N.  headquarters and the field,' says  Fortna, author of the book 'Does Peacekeeping Work?'. Fortna spoke with IPS correspondent Rousbeh Legatis about why  peacekeeping halves the risk of nations returning to armed conflict,  builds bridges of communication between deadly enemies, and leads  primarily to non-military political solutions. Excerpts from the interview follow. Q: In your book, you say that peacekeeping is successful with 'a  clear and resounding yes'.  How does it work?  A: I find that it works through four important pathways:By changing belligerents' incentives so that going back to war is  more costly, while maintaining peace is more rewarding. By alleviating belligerents' fears about each other's intentions and  ameliorating the atmosphere of severe mistrust that is built up  during war. By helping to prevent or nip in the bud accidents and  misunderstandings that might otherwise spiral back to war. And by pressuring the parties to live up to the terms of their  political settlements so that neither party is excluded from the  political process in a way that makes them feel they are 'losing the  peace' and would therefore be better served by returning to war. Q: How specifically does it work?  A: One example of the way that peacekeeping can work to change  belligerents' incentives is the fund that was set up ostensibly to  help RENAMO [Mozambican National Resistance] in Mozambique transform  itself into a political party - this was a straight cash payout that  helped to coopting RENAMO and its leaders into a peaceful political  process. It was legitimised by the fact that the funds came from a neutral  party (the U. N. ).  If the funds had come from the government - as was  done in another case I examined, the Chittagong Hill Tracts in  Bangladesh - this would have led to charges that the leadership had  sold out.  But this fund gave a direct incentive to RENAMO leaders to  maintain peace. Peacekeepers can also help oversee military and political processes,  such as disarmament, that are likely to be plagued by mistrust such  that the parties can't accomplish them on their own, even if they  sincerely desire peace.  Monitoring disarmament in Mozambique was one  example of this, and taking control of strategic diamond mining areas  in Sierra Leone was another example. By investigating allegations of misconduct by both sides,  peacekeepers also provide an important 'third option' for parties  that might otherwise return to war.  If peacekeepers are not present,  the parties have only two options if they think the other side has  violated some part of the agreement: ignore it and risk looking weak  and having the other side take advantage of them more and more, or  respond in kind and risk an escalation back to war.  Q: Is military strength required in U. N.  peacekeeping missions to  bring real change on the ground?  A: One of the most surprising findings of the book is that the more  'robust' and militarily strongest peacekeeping missions are not  necessarily more effective than missions with less military strength. This is not to say that military strength is unimportant, it is often  very helpful for peacekeepers to protect themselves in insecure  environments.  But many of the ways that peacekeepers work is through  non-military mechanisms: through on the spot mediation, through  political cajoling, and by linking peace to ongoing attention and aid  from the international community. The lesson here is that peacekeeping can be effective even where  large militarily robust missions are not feasible. Q: How important is local ownership to make peacekeeping work?  A: Peace is maintained, or not, by the parties to the conflict — the  government and rebel leaders who fought the war, whom I refer to as  the 'peacekept. ' I do not necessarily argue that there needs to be  'local ownership' of peacekeeping — part of the point of peacekeepers  is that they are outsiders, and therefore relatively neutral.  If the  parties could solve the problem on their own, peacekeepers wouldn't  be needed. Rather, the point is that those designing and directing peacekeeping  efforts need to keep in mind how what they do will affect the  decisions of the peacekept.  Locals don't need to own peacekeeping,  but by definition, they own the peace process, for they are the ones  who decide whether peace will hold or war will resume. 